Andrew Huberman: And that leads me to a question that is based on findings that I've heard discussed on social media, which means very little, if anything, unless it's in the context of people who really know exercise science. And you're one such person. And that's this idea that because resistance training can evoke a protein synthesis adaptation response, but that adaptation response lasts about 48 hours before it starts to taper off. That the ideal. In quotes, frequency for training a given muscle group for hypertrophy is about every 48 hours. Is that true?

Andy Galpin: Yes and no. So a couple of things there remember, in order to grow a muscle, there's multiple steps here. So you have the signaling response, which actually happens within seconds of exercise and can last, depending on the marker, up to an hour or 2 hours. Step number two then is gene expression, and we see that that's typically peaked around two to 6 hours post exercise. And then you have following that protein synthesis and that's that longer time frame somewhere between 12 hours there. It's certainly not peaked for 48 hours. It may be still there 48 hours from now, but it is absolutely coming down at that point depending on sort of a number of factors. So that part of it is sort of true. So this is a combination of some half truths and some maybe just pedantic things that aren't really that important to differentiate. The real question, I think, is, like, okay, is it okay to train sooner? Is it better to train sooner? Or actually, is it better to wait longer?

Andy Galpin: There's no real reason to think that you need to train if the goal is hypertrophy any sooner than 48 hours afterwards. I can't think of an advantage that that would confer. I also can't think of any practical applications, athletes, physique, bodybuilders coaches that ever found tremendous success doing that. So I would be very skeptical that that is in any way better. Now, could you do it in some instances of, say, you've got travel coming up like that so that you just yeah.

Andrew Huberman: You want to preload the system by.

Andy Galpin: Destroying the total no problem.

Andrew Huberman: And then waiting seven days or 14 days. I've known people have done that before.

Andy Galpin: I do vacations or layoffs every time.

Andrew Huberman: Like every single annihilate themselves and then take a week layoff.

Andy Galpin: Yeah. Andy it's like there's no benefit there other than psychological. Like I just love it. It feels great to be super sore. I feel less crappy not training for those couple of days because I'm like, I'm super sore anyway.

Andrew Huberman: You need the extended rest.

Andy Galpin: Yeah, of course. And it's just a crappy justification in my brain, that excuse to do something really wild and that I totally don't need. Andy get way sore than I should.

Andrew Huberman: Get Dr. Andy Galvin's suggestions of what not to do, but that he does.

Andy Galpin: Yeah, 100%.
Andrew Huberman: So as you point out before and I can only assume you're referring to me, hypertrophy training is idiot proof, meaning there's a lot of leeway in the variables but not so much leeway that people can do anything. It's bounded by these general principles. So, with your permission, I'm going to do a brief overview of my notes based on your description of the modifiable variables that will direct somebody towards hypertrophy. Keeping in mind this backdrop of exercise choice exercise order selecting appropriate volume that sets and reps training frequency and needing some metric or way to have progression either by adding more weights or by more tension or more metabolic stress and so on. In terms of exercise choice. It sounds like the choice of exercise science not super critical in terms of specificity, but that the ideal circumstances. That people are targeting all the major and, frankly, secondary and minor muscle groups, if you can even call them.

Andrew Huberman: That across their exercise choices, that they're picking exercises that they can perform safely and that they can generate enough intensity so that they're getting close to failure without placing themselves into danger.

Andy Galpin: Right?

Andrew Huberman: So for some people that might mean including large compound free weight exercises like squats and deadlifts andy bent over barbell rows as well as isolation exercises. And for some people there might be a bias toward more isolation exercise science machines. But of course machines don't necessarily mean that you can't use heavy loads. In fact, plateleted machines like Hammer strength machines will allow for quite substantial loads. So picking two or three or more movements per muscle group can be valuable. But that overall consistency is going to outshine variation in the sense that you don't need to hit muscles with a different exercise every workout coming back to the same things has a benefit. And we heard about this in our discussion around strength and power as well. Okay. In terms of order of exercise science too, it sounds like there's a lot of flexibility.

Andrew Huberman: One could do the large compound exercise for, let's say, quadriceps and hamstrings and glutes first, like a squat or a front squat or could deadlift for that matter. But then if one deadlifted andy primarily hit the glutes and hamstrings, then you might want to target the quadriceps more directly with leg extensions. Or if one squatted and was loading the squat bar, carrying the squat bar in a way that was predominantly quadricep and less so glute and hamstring, then leg curls would be a good choice, et cetera. Okay, Andy, train your calves, folks. Very important. Unless you're a genetic freak, of course. It's actually a good opportunity to say unless you're a genetic freak or you just have a genetic predisposition or you've done sports, Andy, you have a genetic predisposition that gives you very large calves that don't require any training at all. I know people like this, they're somewhat rare, but they're out there. And those folks sometimes want to stay away from or minimize their training.
Andy Galpin: Sure. So we have a lot less information on the potential interference or not of high intensity stuff. The stuff we do have suggested it may actually aid in hypertrophy. And that's because if you think about it, one of the potential paths to activation Andy muscle growth is this metabolic disturbance. You're going to get that a lot with the high intensity interval thing. So it's not a terrible thing to do. I wouldn't do it to the level that it compromises your ability to come back. Andy, do your primary training. So if you're so fatigued, your legs are super heavy, they're depleted. You now have to ingest extra carbohydrates to replenish muscle glycogen to be able to handle both recovery and continued training, et cetera. That could then lead to a problem. But in general, we really don't see any reason why that is going to completely block or make it such that your training was quote unquote, wasted or it didn't work.

Andy Galpin: In fact, actually a very recent study came out where they had individuals perform six weeks of purely aerobic endurance, steady state, long duration endurance for six weeks. I think prior to starting a hypertrophy phase compared that to individuals who did not do that. And those folks that did these six weeks of just, I think it was cycling, actually just endurance work, had more muscle growth at the end of their hypertrophy training than those folks that did not. So this shows you very clearly there are a lot of advantages that come with being physically fit to growing muscle. So folks that also have actually hit plateaus a lot, one of the things you may actually see some benefit from is actually doing a little bit more endurance work. Whether it's a steady state stuff, maybe it's the higher intensity stuff. Certainly if you're starting a training phase, it's a pretty good idea to do that. And there's a number of physiological reasons of why that's potentially occurring. But the lowest hanging fruit here is we sort of joke if you're so unfit that you're tying your shoes in your warm up and you're already breaking a sweat, you probably don't have enough fitness to do enough training to get enough hypertrophy. So that is in fact your limiting factor.

Andy Galpin: You're not recovering. You're super fatigued andy damaged and sore because you're so unfit. So get fit first and then you can actually get more gains a week later. So you have to kind of kick the can down the road for a few weeks, but ten weeks later you'll be in a better spot than you were by investing a little bit in your conditioning.
Andrew Huberman: How do other forms of exercise combine with hypertrophy training? For instance, can I do cardiovascular training for two or three days per week, provided that cardiovascular training is of low enough intensity and not disrupt hypertrophy progression. And can I do that cardiovascular exercise before or after the hypertrophy training, or does it need to be separated out?

Andy Galpin: The answer to this is really what we call the crossover interference effect. It's really an energy management issue. So the only time endurance exercise starts to interfere or block or hinder attenuate hypertrophy is in one of two broad categories. Number one, total energy intake. Or your balance is off. So you can ameliorate this by just eating more. If you do that, then the interference effect generally goes away. The second one is you want to make sure you avoid exercise forms for your endurance training that are the same working group and specifically the eccentric portion. So for example, we see much more interference with running on leg hypertrophy than we do with cycling, right? Less eccentric pounding and loading, less damage, less things to recover from. The tissue seems to be totally fine. The only other thing you need to worry about here is total volume of your endurance work. So if you're doing a moderate intensity for a moderate duration, say 70% of your maximum heart rate for 25 minutes, it's unlikely to do much damage.

Andy Galpin: In terms of blocking hypertrophy, you're totally fine. Can you do it before or after your workout? It's probably not going to matter that much. So pre fatigue is okay for hypertrophy. So if your pre fatigue is coming from endurance, then you're totally fine. Not a big deal afterwards. Cool. You want to break it up into multiple sessions, that's probably better, right? So if you do your endurance work on a separate day, that's probably best case scenario. If you can't do that but you can break it up into two workouts. Say you lift in the morning and then you do your quote unquote cardio at night. Maybe that's second best. Third best is doing it at the end of your lift. Andy finishing it, that's fine. Just make sure that you're maximizing your recovery on all the other tricks we'll talk about later. Make sure the calories are there, make sure you're not doing a lot of eccentric landing in that endurance stuff and you'll be just fine.

Andrew Huberman: And where does higher intensity cardio fit into a hypertrophy program? So higher intensity cardio, for instance, in my mind, is getting on the assault bike and doing eight intervals of 22nd sprints and ten second rest in between, or perhaps going to a field and doing some bounds and sprints and things of that sort. Not going all out, not running for one's life, but getting up to about 85, 90% of running for one's life.
Andy Galpin: You could also look at things like Hrv heart rate variability, which is a very classic marker and much more sensitive to changes with training than something like a resting heart rate, which is one thing you can actually do that's totally cost free. Just look at your changes. And any elevation resting heart rate over time, especially more than three to five consecutive days, is an indicator. But Hrv is much more sensitive to things like training induced overload. So that's a quick version of stuff that we're going to pay attention to. The last one, I would add there is simply motivation. So if you're really training hard and you like training hard and you just cannot force yourself to go anymore, that in Andy of itself can be a good indication of it's. Maybe not the day, maybe not the week. With all of these things you want to be careful about overreacting to a single day measure. Again, we need to look at at least a trend of more than three days. Honestly, I'm looking at more than five days.

Andy Galpin: I'm going to pull back from that and think about what phase of training we're in, what part of the year we're in, typically with our athletes in season, preseason, postseason offseason, et cetera, to make our decisions about what we're going to do about it? Are we canning the entire workout? Are we doing a modified lower version, lower intensity my default. Generally if hypertrophy is the goal, remember, volume is the driver there. So if I can, can we get in? Can we go real light? Let's go to six out of ten Rpe. So relative perceived exertion, maybe we'll reduce the range of motion, maybe we'll make it a little bit easier, maybe go to machines or instead of going a squat, we'll just do leg extension, something like that. But I want to still get enough volume in there that will keep you on target again, even going at 50%, not to high repetition, 50% for a set of ten, three sets.

Andy Galpin: Just get a nice blood flow in there, get it in, get it out, aid in recovery and then move on and come back the next day. That's probably what I would do. Rather than canning the entire session.
Andy Galpin: It's going to be associated with things like Rabdo, which is you're going to see your urine is purple, it's extremely dark because you've got so much muscle breakdown, that happens. And kidneys can have a problem and you put a bunch of stuff in there. So we use those biomarkers. We'll. Actually also look at probably a couple of things you're familiar with alt and ASD. These are excellent biomarkers of muscle breakdown. So if we are actually suspecting that this is a chronic problem, we're going to actually go, andy, pull some blood. If it's just like, I'm super sore today, we're going to use that subjective marker. But if we're seeing this as constant, like, man, are we really pushing you way too much? Is there some sort of systemic problem? We're going to blood and we're going to look at all those different things. Now, AST to alt is really specific, and I don't want to take us too far off track here, but the ratio to those things is actually very important as well. So if you look at the AST to alt ratio, typically the number we'll look at is like 1.67.

Andy Galpin: As that ratio is like higher than that, you have a pretty high risk of muscle damage. But really, between me and you and a few of these listeners, anytime we start seeing AST outkick alt, we're immediately thinking, as in the ratio being higher than one, we're immediately thinking like there's something happening muscle damage wise. So that's actually a sneaky good indicator of just total muscle mass because the vast majority of that's going to be in muscle. So those are actually some markers that we like a lot. If muscle damage is the thing we're concerned with, if we are more concerned with things like total training volume, systemic overload, then we may turn to something more like sleep. There's a lot of information we can actually glean from changes in sleep behavior and function.
Andrew Huberman: So you told us a lot about volume and frequency and how that relates to protein synthesis and recovery to evoke the hypertrophy adaptation response. How should people think about systemic damage? Andy recovery? Because obviously the nervous system and the way it interacts with the neuromuscular system is the site of all the action here, or at least a lot of the action and the nervous system can in fact become fatigued. It has a great capacity. But the whole system that we're talking about can be worked to the extent that even if a muscle group like the biceps or the back is being allowed to rest while you're training legs and other muscle groups, that your whole neuromuscular system needs rest. How does one determine whether or not your entire body needs complete rest or low level active rest, or exercise of a different kind?

Andy Galpin: Yeah, sure. So I want to actually tackle this because we're on the topic of hypertrophy. I'm assuming that that's the goal in mind here.

Andrew Huberman: Yes, here I'm asking specifically within the context of hypertrophy. I realized that for other training goals, the answer to this question could be quite different.

Andy Galpin: Yeah. Okay. So we actually do this in a couple of different ways. Let's start local and work back to systemic. Right? Because number one, what you're really concerned about is at the local muscle level is, am I going to create excessive damage, Andy? And I don't necessarily mean muscle damage here, I mean injury. Right. So the kind of rule of thumb we use is like three out of ten in terms of soreness. If you're more than three out of ten in terms of soreness, we're going to start asking questions. If you're higher than six out of ten, we're probably not training.

Andrew Huberman: This is subjective measure.

Andy Galpin: Total subjective measure, right. And you'll know very quickly, right, if you can barely graze your peck with your fingertip and then you're like, oh, I don't care what you score that we're not training. There's just no damage. If you're three out of ten, if you're just like, oh, I'm kind of like a little bit stiff here, but once you get warmed up, you start feeling okay, you're probably okay to proceed there. So that is a very easy way to just think about soreness. You're going to be a little bit tight depending on your training frequency. Now zooming out to systemic. We use a whole host of things, so we actually have a whole host of bowel markers we use. You can get a lot of these from blood. So you can look at things like creatine kinase. That's the very common one marker of muscle damage. We'll actually look at LDH, we'll look at myoglobulin. If you think about hemoglobin is the molecule that carries oxygen throughout your blood. The myoglobin is the part of that that's actually in muscle. So when muscle gets broken down, that gets leaked out and put in your blood, that's one of the markers, actually.
Andy Galpin: Are these numbers you just absolutely don't do in strength training, right? Just like sets of 123456, got 810, twelve, like do not program a set of 30.

Andrew Huberman: Now, when I'm trained sets of seven.

Andy Galpin: To nine, it's great. We'll use sets of seven a lot with weightlifters because you can actually count numbers more effectively.

Andrew Huberman: But what happens in seven to nine rep ranges?

Andy Galpin: So this is actually wonderful area of these, like five to eight repetitions, where you're going to get a nice combination of a lot of strength gains and a lot of hypertrophy. So someone who's coming in going, man, I want to get stronger and I want to add muscle. What do I do here? Well, that's actually a really nice answer. Train pretty hard in that like four to eight repetition range, and you're going to get a lot stronger and you'll still induce a lot of hypertrophy. If you want to really maximize hypertrophy, I would probably spend most of your time in the eight to 15 repetition per set range. You can go up to 30. Admittedly, though, I don't think it's optimal to spend most of your time at more than 15 reps per set. It's very challenging to maintain the focus required at rep 27 to actually get sufficient failure by rep. You just give up way too early. It's hard to do the same thing at the bottom end of that spectrum in terms of really heavy to get there. So I really, honestly think eight to 15 is still it's cliche.

Andy Galpin: It's that textbook number. But that's a reason that's a textbook. It is tried and true and very, very effective. If, for instance, you want to get strength, though Andy not invoke a lot of hypertrophy, you have a couple of tricks you can pull. Number one, stay south of that five repetition range. You do sets of one sets of two, go as heavy as you can with all appropriate considerations, and stick within, maybe even up to three reps per set. You start getting the four to five to six. Now you're going to start itching towards that hypertrophy range. So stay down there, do a lot more total sets. So do a classic example would be something like eight sets of three, right? You're going to get a lot of practice. You're going to get 24 very high quality reps with a lot of rest in between. You go from there, you go to managing caloric intake, making sure your protein is still on point. You want to recover. But if your total calories aren't greater than 10% to 15% above your maintenance needs, then you're not going to be able to put on a whole bunch of muscle mass because you just don't have the fuel for it.

Andy Galpin: You can also then space your workouts out so that stimulus isn't coming extremely often. So if you do that thing a couple of times a week, it's not enough frequency in that signal. So remember, that signal has to be frequent or loud. You didn't make it super loud, and now you're not making it super frequent. You can get very strong like that and put on very low amounts of hypertrophy if that's sort of the choice.
Andy Galpin: Practically, it's challenging for people to hit sufficient volume without just being so demoralized afterwards because they're in so much pain, they can't get out of their car because their legs are so trash, they can't sit on the toilet and get back up without crying for pain.

Andrew Huberman: That is not good. No, that's not good.

Andy Galpin: I say that because those are actual examples that have happened in my life.

Andrew Huberman: Yeah. I'm realizing as we're having this conversation about ways to stimulate hypertrophy, that I've sort of defaulted to more intensity as opposed to volume because of the time factor. I have a lot of other things going on in my life. And so within that hour, I can't get enough sets in across all the muscle groups I need to hit, and I'm only going to do it about once a week. And so it's at least for me, more advantageous to just train extremely hard. I actually use the pre exhaustion technique that you mentioned before, or pre fatigue, as you referred to it, of hitting something really strong with an isolation exercise, then doing compound exercise. Science starting to think, based on what you've told me, that pre fatigue and then a compound exercise, in some ways it's not really two sets, because if you're going to failure force reps, you're kind of pushing past failure, then you're doing a compound exercise and you're doing that two or three times.

Andrew Huberman: Well, that sounds like four to six sets, but the force repetitions are almost like an additional set, right?

Andy Galpin: Yes.

Andrew Huberman: And so it's not 20 sets, but it's four to six really, really hard sets that go beyond what we normally think of as a set.

Andy Galpin: Totally.

Andrew Huberman: Okay, so the difference between running on concrete and running on sand, when I go for a sand run, it's a very different experience.

Andy Galpin: Totally. And this is why I should have mentioned this at the very, very beginning of our chat today, but all of these numbers that I'll give you for any exercise adaptation, you cannot think of them as hard lines. They are gradients. Andy so when we think about the number for hypertrophy in terms of repetitions, I said four to 30, what do you think happens at three? Do you think hypertrophy just stops? In fact, the number you'll see in literature is more like six to 30. I actually slide it down to four, though, like personal preference because of that, but it just fades away. What do you think happens at rep? 31, 35? It just fades gradually over time. So you actually sort of brought this up. One of your other questions, Andy, I'm not sure if you were even thinking about this, or maybe you were, I just babbled on about something else. But if strength happens between this, like one to five repetition range, and hypertrophy typically happens in this like eight to 30 range, what happens if I were to do sets of six or God forbid, seven, like seven and nine?
Andrew Huberman: Do as I say, not as I do. The famous words of every research professor.

Andy Galpin: Yeah. I think 48 hours is a reasonable time to wait. Can't think of any advantage of going sooner than that. There's really not a tremendous amount of advantage of waiting much longer than that. Certainly 72 hours is fine as long as you're hitting these concepts we've talked about. You can let really life determine that there are situations, too, with like particularly our athletes, where we have to kind of break that because of schedule obligations. They're playing every fifth day, every third day, or something like that. Andy you're just going to have to lift some back to back days. You're just going to have to get it done. But, yeah, I can't think of why I would go out of my way to do that.

Andrew Huberman: The second part of that question is, let's say somebody trains a muscle. They train it properly, they hit it in the appropriate rep ranges and appropriate rest, et cetera. The stimulus is there, the adaptation is set in motion. They're getting somewhere at 48 hours or so, a protein synthesis peak that's going to taper off. But they don't train it 48 hours later or 72 hours later. They train it five or six days later, not because they're lazy, not because they don't care, but because they have other priorities that are woven in with getting hypertrophy in this muscle. There are people who exist only to get hypertrophy in a given muscle group, but let's be fair, most people would like to grow that muscle group, but then does it necessarily mean that the muscle starts to revert to its pre hypertrophic state? That is, does it atrophy and get smaller again?

Andrew Huberman: Because if it doesn't, I could see a lot of reasons for hitting a muscle group once every five days or seven days, provided you hold on to the hypertrophy that you initiated five or seven days ago.

Andy Galpin: Yeah, there's no reason to think you will lose anything in that sort of a time domain, five to seven days. The only challenge with training that infrequently is can you actually get enough total volume done? So if you're going to train a muscle once a week, you either have to go to real failure, real damage, andy Soreness, or you have to figure out a way to hit 20 sets that day in that muscle. Not at all impossible, especially if you're thinking, well, actually, all I have to do is 15. I'm going to do five sets of three exercises. That's not outrageous, not at all. So, like, absolutely possible. If you're wanting to go more towards 20 or getting closer to that 25 now, it starts to get pretty challenging. So scientifically, the research will suggest it's going to be equally effective.
Andrew Huberman: You told me that even if you have a muscle group that's a hyper responder, in terms of hypertrophy, getting at least one or two good hard sets per week is good because you want to keep functionality in that neuromuscular system.

Andy Galpin: Love it.

Andrew Huberman: Okay. In terms of volume, again, we have a large amount of variation, is what I'm hearing, that the total number of sets per week is a strong driving force of program design and selection. That ideally, you're performing ten to 20 and probably more like 15 to 20 sets per week. And that could be divided up across multiple workouts or done in one workout, but that's ten to 20 sets per week per muscle group, not really taking into account indirect activation. So that would be ten to 20 sets for biceps, your back work is going to hit your biceps a little bit, maybe a bit more, depending on the exercise selection, but it's really ten to 20. And given that hypertrophy can still occur and maybe even occurs better with more volume, then don't include the indirect work unless something about the architecture of your body and the inability to engage certain muscle groups makes a pull up really an arm exercise for you. Do I have that right?

Andy Galpin: The way that I would maybe define it is typically with movements we consider to be there to be primary movers, secondary movers, and then tertiary movements. Right. If it is a primary or secondary, I'm probably counting it. If it's tertiary or less, I'm probably not counting it.

Andrew Huberman: Got it. So going back to our example of.

Andy Galpin: A pull up so, an example of a pull up, I probably wouldn't count the biceps in a pull up, but I would probably count the biceps during a chin up.

Andrew Huberman: Would you count the rear deltoid in a pull up?

Andy Galpin: Probably not. Maybe it just depends. Probably not, though.

Andrew Huberman: Okay, train the rear delts, all that's.

Andy Galpin: Only, honestly, the reason I answered that is because most people don't do anything for the real delts anyways.

Andrew Huberman: But they should, right?

Andy Galpin: Absolutely. That's why I didn't want to count it. I wanted you to go out of your way to make sure you did something specifically for the real rear delts.

Andrew Huberman: For aesthetics and for functionality, for health and balance across the shoulders, totally.

Andy Galpin: Neck, shoulder, all of it.

Andrew Huberman: I'm so happy to hear you say this. I'm a huge fan of people doing rear deltoid work for all the reasons you described. Andy neck work, for that matter. I think people forget that the neck is the upper part of your spine. Andy for postural reasons. Andy for stabilization and safety reasons. It's really critical, but I think most people aren't familiar with how best to train the rear deltoids and neck. Andy I know a number of people are afraid of getting a big neck, which, for reasons that are still unclear to me, is referred to as no neck. But let's leave out that no neck comment for the moment.
Andy Galpin: You're going to hit most of those muscles to your 15 working sets, especially if you take sort of that last set each day to pretty close to failure. That's going to get some more serious work done, but you're not going to be so fatigued. You can't come back and train it a couple of days later and you'll be fine. So you could even split that up into two days a week. And now all you really have to do is hit something like seven working sets. So maybe that's two exercise science day, maybe some sort of a leg press and a leg hinge. Three to four sets each. You can hit six to eight sets that day. You do that three days a week. Now all of sudden a you're at that 2024 sets. But I think a bit of boom. Same thing with the upper body. I just gave lower body examples because I like the lower body more. So it's not that challenging to get to those numbers. And those workouts can be extremely short. So if you were doing that three days a week, you're doing that one exercise upper body, one exercise lower body.

Andy Galpin: That certainly shouldn't take more than 40 minutes.

Andrew Huberman: I'm happy to hear that. Not because I don't like training, please excuse the double negative, but I've found that resistance training workouts that extend longer than 1 hour of work and certainly longer than 75 minutes of work, leave me very fatigued.

Andy Galpin: Oh, sure.

Andrew Huberman: And fatigued to the point where concentrating on cognitive work throughout the day can be challenging. Need a longer nap in the afternoon. I'm a big proponent of naps in the afternoon in any case, but requiring longer naps in the afternoon, et cetera. So at least for me, restricting the resistance training workouts to about 550 to 60 minutes of real work, for me, three or four times per week has helped tremendously. So it's a case where doing higher intensity work in a shorter period of time and actually hitting muscle groups less frequently, for me, that's, again, once directly, once indirectly has worked really well. And as you mentioned earlier, this could very well be explained by not my recovery quotient as some sort of genetic or physiological variable, but the way that I'm training. And indeed, I like to do a few force reps and go to failure on many sets. And weaned in that genre of training, it's also fun.

Andy Galpin: Like to just train hard. It is really fun.

Andrew Huberman: It is. I think that I've learned a lot by training, to quote unquote, to failure. Of course, I think there's a lot of learning in there, provided it's done safely. But what you're describing actually inspires me to at least give a try to these other sorts of splits and ways of training for hypertrophy andy strength. Because this notion of not necessarily having to go to failure, andy still being able to evoke strength and hypertrophy adaptations is a really intriguing one. Dare I even say a seductive one.
Andy Galpin: In my opinion, to get that volume accomplished in a little bit more frequent patterns, but not once a week. So I like to kind of have it right there for most people. Again, not because it is technically, quote unquote, more effective, but because you're less likely to fail to progress because of skipping a workout. Something popping up, your power going out in your garage door, being locked on you or whatever.

Andrew Huberman: Imagine that. That happened to me this morning. Folks couldn't get out of my driveway because the electronic gate was down. Because the power was down. Anyway, solve that problem. The way you describe it, my sense is that workouts will last somewhere between one and 2 hours of real work. Is that about right?

Andy Galpin: It doesn't have to be nearly that long. I mean, you could certainly get enough work done in 30 minutes, even a whole body workout. Yeah, absolutely. So if you're doing that three days a week. So remember the numbers we're trying to hit here. Let's say we're trying to hit 15 working sets per muscle group per week. That's five working sets per day per muscle group. So if you did one exercise for that day, let's say you did squats, you did five sets, you did that three days a week. You're done. There's your 15.

Andrew Huberman: But there are other muscle groups to hit on the same day you're doing squats if you're doing whole body.

Andy Galpin: Yeah. So you've gotten them all already, andy so all the leg muscles in that example are taken care of.

Andrew Huberman: So you would not do separate hamstring work.

Andy Galpin: You wouldn't need to. Now, hamstrings is actually a little bit of a caveat. That's a good example of an exercise or a muscle group that's probably really good to make sure you isolate. It's challenging to get with your standard deadlift and squat. It's one of the probably ones that's most important to go target outside of that. But in theory, theoretically though, outside of that, you would get most of your leg muscles done with even a single exercise and even if you wanted to change it up. So you said, all right, monday I'm going to do a squat variation. Wednesday, the next day lift, I'm going to do some sort of deadlift hinging variation. And then maybe Friday my third day, I'm going to do some sort of unilateral, maybe rear foot elevated split squat or something like that. All right. Maybe even a lateral lunge, maybe a different plane. Okay, you're in a pretty good spot.
Andy Galpin: Yeah, I can't wait to break all that stuff down. We got a very long discussion for all those things.

Andrew Huberman: We will get into it in all its practical realities and actionables before long. What about rest between sets?

Andy Galpin: Great. This is the interplay now. So one actually thing we said for a long time is you want to stick between 30 to 90 seconds of rest between sets for hypertrophy. And that's because you're trying to activate this metabolic disturbance or disruption. You need a little bit of a burn, a little bit of a pump to go there. More recent research, a lot of these out of Brad Schoenfeld's lab and others, have shown that that just doesn't seem to be the case again for moderate to newly trained individuals. Whether that's the case for the highly trained folks, I don't necessarily know. I don't think there's any difference here. So you can take up to three to five minutes of rest in between sets and be fine. The caveat here, though, is this if you're going to rest longer, that means the metabolic challenge is lower. So you need to then increase the challenge in either mechanical tension, which think about as weight, load or muscle breakdown, so you can't lower one of the variables, keep everything else the same and expect the same result. So if you're going to have more rest, then you need to either preserve the load on your bar or the volume.

Andy Galpin: One of the two has to happen. So this gives people a lot of opportunity. I generally tell people if you're going to train for hypertrophy, it's probably best to stay in the two minute range. At most you can go longer. But a lot of people have a hard time actually coming back and then executing that next set with enough intent to get there. And or it's going to make your workouts tremendously long. So you can stick to the shorter one. You don't have as much mechanical tension, but that's okay. You can still get there, but in reality it is. You can do whatever you would like.

Andrew Huberman: Tell me if this is a reasonable structure, given what you've told us. Three exercises per muscle group. First exercise, slightly heavier loads. So repetition ranges somewhere between, let's say five andy eight, with perhaps hitting failure or close to it on the last set. Rest periods of somewhere between two or let's get wild and say five minutes.

Andy Galpin: Sure.
Andy Galpin: That minus two. Failure is still needed in caveat, too, which is, again, very, very highly trained individuals. You won't see people who are like Eric or other folks who are six to eight to ten years into very serious training, who don't have to go to failure, probably a little bit more than what I just said. So the layout that they brought in, their paper was very nice and they basically said, okay, here's a couple of scenarios in which going to failure is maybe the best way to do it. Number one, you probably should do it on a little bit of the safer exercises. So maybe taking your back squat on a barbell to complete failure and doing that as like a standard protocol multiple times a week, it's maybe not the best choice. So maybe if you're going to do barwell back squats, you take that to your one or two reps in reserve stop there. It's a lot of work. It actually going back to our discussion of the prolific chart.

Andy Galpin: It's a similar idea, right, where you're going to spend most of your time in these working sets, 70 to 90 sort of percent, and then you're going to take that failure to maybe the hack squat machine or maybe even to the leg extension machine. So a little bit of a safer exercise. They also can tend to be single joint exercises, don't have to be, but they're just ones that are not as complicated and you're not likely to injure other body parts when you're doing it. All right, so that's one way to go about it. Another way to go about it is simply doing it on the last movement of the day. And so, again, you're not going to do it on your first three or four exercises, but whatever your last finisher is, you'll hit total failure on that one, andy, that kind of keeps you in a range of, yeah, you hit some failure, you got a lot of overall work done. So that's a lot of stimulus, that's a lot of noise going to that nucleus that says grow, grow, grow. But you didn't totally obliterate yourself, especially if you don't have the assistance of anabolic steroids, right?

Andy Galpin: That's very important. If you have those, you can push this a lot harder because your recovery would be significantly enhanced. If not, you kind of want to walk away from that.

Andrew Huberman: I have to assume that 99% of people listening to this do not. And yet among those. Who are not taking anything in terms of anabolics. There, I think, is a large range of recovery quotients out there. Some people just tend to recover better. Some people, I think, also are far more diligent about what I would call the necessary but not sufficient variables of adequate sleep, proper nutrition, limiting stress, andy, so on.
Andrew Huberman: What about repetition ranges? You've mentioned pretty broad repetition ranges. How many repetitions per set is required in order to induce hypertrophy?

Andy Galpin: Yeah. So there are two caveats here before I give you well, the number is somewhere between like four to 30 reps. 30 repetitions? Absolutely. In fact I think you can go much higher.

Andrew Huberman: The first 20 have to feel exceedingly light.

Andy Galpin: Correct.

Andrew Huberman: And during those 1st 20 or so repetitions is the goal still to contract the muscle as hard as possible on each repetition.

Andy Galpin: So this is the caveats here. So caveat number one is there is an assumption that by the end of this set you're getting somewhat close to failure, Andy, so you don't have to go to absolute failure to induce most like perturb, but you also have to get kind of close. So if you're going to do a set of 25 and you finish it and you're like, OOH yeah, like that was kind of starting to get hard at the end, that's not going to be enough. If you're going to do a set of five or six and the same sort of expression comes out of your mouth, it's not going to be enough. So in that case it doesn't matter your rep range. If you're not getting somewhat close to failure again, it doesn't need to be complete failure. A good number to think about is like minus two, which is what we call reps in reserve, which is sort of like I got within two or so reps of failure and then I stopped.

Andrew Huberman: And can we define failure, at least for sake of this portion of the conversation, as the point at which you can no longer move the resistance, could be your body, could be a weight machine, et cetera, that you can no longer move the resistance anymore in the concentric phase of the exercise movement in good form.

Andy Galpin: Correct. But that's a really nice momentary muscular failure is how we typically define it. There's a wonderful review, I think it's open access that just came out in the last handful of months. Eric helms his team out of New Zealand. Eric is a great scientist and a very experienced physique coach and a competitor himself, so he knows a lot about this area. And that paper went through all the exact definitions in detail, all the caveats that we're not going to have time to get into today. So I would recommend folks like check that out if they want more information. But I'll try to get to the highlights of it right here. So what they basically showed is going all the way to failure in the defining failure like you just did, right? So momentary muscular failure, you can't complete another repetition through complete range of motion, through whatever range of motion you determine prior to, as well as with good technique, so other body parts aren't being compromised, sort of, et cetera, and doesn't need to be total failure.
Andy Galpin: What you really want to see is how many actually people got better, how many got worse, how many maybe change. And if so, we'll always report those individual data because when you go to train you're, you, you're not the group average. That's very important to them. So if you do that, you can see a beautiful line of these hyper responders, the bell curve in the middle of the normal responders. And those folks who like through any training study, just won't get any better if you can tease out what you can't. But let's say in science you could tease out all the extra factors. Total stress load, hydration, sleep, et cetera. What you often see is non responders. A lot of the time. It's not that they have a physiological inability, it's just that they need a different protocol. And a lot of times it's they just need more volume. So if they can handle that and they're not excessively beat up, just give them more volume and they tend to see a lot of breakthroughs. You see the same thing with plateaus. So it's typically sort of just like, okay, the routine you're on, you've been on it for too long.

Andy Galpin: We need to either go to the other end of the hypertrophy spectrum for intensity, which means if you've been in the 60% to 70% of your one repetition max range, maybe we actually need to go heavier, take our repetitions down, maybe even our total volume down, and go heavier. Try that a great way to break through plateaus of grand. If all the other boxes are checked, the other one is do the opposite, which is like, okay, we're going to go higher, we're going to go set to 20, set to 25. Very high repetition range. And really get after it not and do as much damage because you don't tend to get as sore from those really high repetition ranges. You'll get more sore from the lower repetition, higher intensity range than you will typically the other ones, and see if we can bust through some plateaus there. So it just generally means you need to do something a little bit different than your training partner.

Andrew Huberman: So we've talked about exercise choice and we've talked about the number of sets that one needs in order to induce hypertrophy per week.
Andrew Huberman: You've established that ten, really, to 20 sets per week is the kind of bounds for maintaining andy initiating hypertrophy.

Andy Galpin: Yeah. If I were to flag one of them, I would say 15 to 20 is the sets that you want to get working. Now, it gets complicated when you ask, well, how many reps per set do I have to get to? Okay, well, we also can complicate that by repetition, type and tempo. Just sort of let all that go for now and just think, if you're getting close to that range, you're in the spot. And all you have to do now is balance two things recovery and continued training. So if you're somewhere in this ten to 20 working sets range, and you're in a position where you can continue to do that, you're not so sore and so damaged and beat up that you can't maintain that volume. For eight weeks at a time, or at least six weeks at a time, then I'd probably say either. The style of repetitions, the amount of repetitions per set you're doing are too much. The volume is getting to you. However, if you're not seeing adaptations, then I'd say maybe the repetitions aren't enough. And so that's the kind of game you're running now.

Andy Galpin: There could be plenty of other factors. Intensity, of course, yeah, intensity, intent. And then of course, the other things sleep, nutrition, et cetera, all these other things that go into our visible stressor category that we always analyze. This sort of brings up this idea of responders and non responders. So we get this one a ton. So why is it some people, my gym buddy, my roommate, we go to sleep the same time, we're on the same nutrition plan, we work out together, she triples in muscle size and I don't have no gain whatsoever. Well, there's a lot of work that we're trying to do to identify the molecular mechanisms behind responders and non responders because they clearly exist. In fact, this is one of the reasons why every paper I basically will ever publish again, if I do, always reports individual person data. So rather than group averages, you get to see if there's ten subjects in it. You get to see how each of the ten responded because the group average can get confusing.
Andy Galpin: It's uncommon to not be able to activate your biceps. Right? Everyone can do that. But if you're just like, man, I can't get this here, I'm just going to stop doing it. Do not do that. Just keep at it and just keep concentrating and thinking about that muscle group. It will take some time. It's very common to have challenges activating lats. Yeah.

Andrew Huberman: I've noticed that many of the muscle groups that were responsible for a large fraction of the work in the various sports that I played as a young child are muscles that are very easy for me to selectively isolate and induce hypertrophy in. I suppose I'm one of those mutants where my lats happen to be one such of those muscle groups. I think that's because I swam a lot when I was a kid, literally.

Andy Galpin: Going to ask, were you a swimmer?

Andrew Huberman: Yeah.

Andy Galpin: That's like a telltale sign.

Andrew Huberman: Yeah, every kid in my town swam and played soccer.

Andy Galpin: There you go.

Andrew Huberman: And then later I skateboarded and did.

Andy Galpin: Some you generally hear that answer, you either were a swimmer or you were a wrestler. So it's like that pulling and pulled toward you is thousands of repetitions allowed you to get very good at contracting.

Andrew Huberman: But because I also played soccer, andy skateboarding, but I didn't do any baseball, basketball, or football. Muscle groups like Deltoids are very challenging to activate and isolate. So I do think that early development is superimposed on a genetic template that sort of predicts which muscle groups are going to be easier or harder to isolate and train.

Andy Galpin: It's also a very good case for why it's important to do as many different athletic activities as you can in your youth. Yeah.

Andrew Huberman: And if you do skateboard, definitely learn to ride switch, because every skateboarder I know has one leg that's larger than the other and one calf that's larger than the other. And actually, for that matter, people that do martial arts that don't learn to if they're not south paw, if they don't learn to switch up and do their work south paw, you see the same thing. I mean, you're building an asymmetry into the system, and it's not just muscular, it's neural. Strongly neural. So, yeah, kids parents get your kids doing a bunch of different things. I suppose gymnastics would probably be the best sport all around in terms of movement in multiple planes and activating all the different muscle groups.

Andy Galpin: Yes and no. There's a lot of benefit, no question about it. There's a lot of other things, though, that has limited ability. So almost everything in not like gymnastics great, but almost everything in that is pre planned, which is a major downfall. Right. So the joy of skating is there's so much proprioceptive input that you have to make decisions very quickly in small windows. Now, you have a little bit of that when you're flipping in the air and you have to land. But gymnasts tend to have a very specific routine that they're working on, and they work on that routine for years.

Andrew Huberman: Skateboarding, for me, was transportation, it was freedom, and it didn't require any coaches or parental oversight.

Andy Galpin: Yeah. Ball sports have the beauty of reaction and things like that. So all of them are wonderful. Yeah. Good to do a lot of them.
Peter Attia: There's not one thing that I'll tell patients is more important than exercise. And by the way, it's not the sort of pathetic recommendations that are made. You have to exercise a lot more if you want to get this maximum benefit. The maximum benefit comes going from nothing to something. So if you go from being completely sedentary to doing 15 met hours per week, you'll get probably a 50% reduction in risk. So a met hour, a met just for people who don't know is a metabolic equivalent. So we're exerting about 1.3 mets sitting here talking. If we were sitting here being quiet, it would be about one met. Walking really briskly would be about five mets. So 15 met hours per week would be three 1 hour really brisk walks. That's not a lot of work. But just going from doing nothing to doing that would give you 50% of the benefit that you would get from going all the way. Now, again, I'm personally a little skeptical of how much that's I think it's probably a bit less than that.

Peter Attia: I think there's more upside than people appreciate, but the studies I don't think, can truly capture that. But look, there's no reason to not be exercising more than that and capture more benefit, even though the rate at which you accrue it is less. And it also speaks to. The health span side of this, which is not necessarily captured in those data. The health spin gets back to the functional piece we opened with, which is, what do you want to be doing in your marginal decade? Do you want to be able to pick up a great grandkid if they come running at you? Do you want to be able to get up off the floor? Do you want to be able to play on the floor with a kid and then get up on your own?

Andrew Huberman: And I think most people are thinking final years of life. They're trying to think, how can they take themselves to the bathroom? They're thinking, how can they sit up off the toilet? I mean, really vegetative type functions, right? At some level. I love this, again, this idea of marginal decade and using that as a way to back cast to actual methods and behaviors and protocols that one should be doing on a daily basis. I'll use anecdata, as it's now called, to cite just I know, three Nobel Prize winners, which doesn't mean anything except that they did beautiful work. But the point is that they're all in their 90s. So I'll name them because I'm complimenting them for what they've done, not just their work, but what I'm about to describe. So Eric Kendall at Columbia, Nobel Prize winner for work on memory, torrence and Vizal for work on neuroplasticity. And then Richard Axel, who's also at Columbia Nobel Prize winning work for molecular biology of smell and molecular biology generally.

Andrew Huberman: All three of them still alive. Richard's younger compared to the other two. All three of them either swim, jog or play tennis or racquetball, I think is Richard's thing multiple times per week. Eric was they're all cognitively, still extremely sharp, still interested in the arts, doing science, curious about science, running laboratories, writing books, going on podcasts. And it's incredible. Again, that's anecdota. But I was kind of surprised to learn that colleagues that were so intellectually strong were also so obsessed with exercise. I mean, they really are obsessed with their exercise routine and early on linked that to some of their intellectual vigor over time. I want to just also use that as a jumping off point to ask about one kind of niche thing. But it comes up. I don't think I'm going to out which one of those told me this, but one of those three individuals choose an excessive amount of nicorette used to be a smoker.
Andrew Huberman: Not low, but moderate. Now, there is an exception to that, which is if I do a high intensity resistance training session early in the morning, say train legs or train torso or even small body parts early in the morning, then I make sure to incorporate more starchy carbohydrates and some fruit, some simple sugars as well, into the first meal of the day so that I can replenish the glycogen that I depleted during those high intensity resistance training sessions. However, after talking to Dr. Dr. Andy Galpin realized that I really shouldn't worry about or be afraid of eating something before training if I'm really hungry in the morning. So what I'm referring to here are the times in which I wake up and I want to train. But I personally like to train fasted and caffeinated. Yes, I do recommend that people delay their caffeine intake 90 to 120 minutes after waking.

Andrew Huberman: If, and only if you have trouble with an afternoon crash, real fatigue in the afternoon, then it makes sense to delay your caffeine 90 to 120 minutes after waking. However, the exception to that is that if I'm going to train early in the day, I do ingest water to hydrate as well as electrolytes and caffeine prior to training. And sometimes that means I'm drinking caffeine within 30 minutes or 60 minutes of waking. I've tried to be clear about this in previous episodes, but I think a number of people have come to think that I always delay my caffeine intake 90 to 120 minutes after waking, and that's simply not the case if I'm going to train. In particular, if I'm going to do high intensity resistance training or a long run, I will ingest caffeine sooner than 90 to 120 minutes after waking. And in addition to that, yes, I tend to eat my first meal around 11:00 a.m., maybe twelve noon. But if I wake up and I'm very hungry, I will eat a small meal that includes typically some protein and some fat. So some Brazil nuts, maybe a couple of scoops of whey protein would be typical for me. Or maybe even a little bit of oatmeal, some whey protein, not a lot of food in my gut. But after talking to Dr. Andy Galpin, what I learned was for some people training fasted feels best.
Andrew Huberman: The second tool to enhance your fitness under this category of nutrition and supplementation is creatine. Now, again, creatine is not just found in supplement form. It's also found, of course, in foods, in particular red meat. However, the amount of red meat that one would have to eat in order to get the amount of creatine that one would start to see a real performance enhancing effect is just far too high. You'd be ingesting far too much of other things in red meat that you wouldn't want that much of. And for that reason, I and many other people will take creatine daily. We now know there's no need to so called load creatine in the old days, as it were. So old days, by the way, meaning mid ninety s and two thousand s, we were all that we had to load creatine. We had to take high dose creatine for four or five days, and then you could back off to a maintenance dose. Now, it's very clear you can just take a daily dose of creatine and that it really doesn't matter when you take that creatine.

Andrew Huberman: You could take it post workout, as many people do. You could take it pre workout, it really doesn't seem to matter. I happen to take it post workout just as a matter of habit. But again, you could take it any time of day. Now, the point I want to make about creatine is one that's a bit different than the other discussions out there. I have no issue with the majority of what's discussed about creatine out there. For instance, that creatine monohydrate is the most effective form. Fortunately, creatine monohydrate is also the least expensive form of creatine that's sold out there. I see no evidence whatsoever that the other forms of creatine are superior to creatine monohydrate. But what you'll usually hear is that taking 5 grams of creatine monohydrate per day is ideal for everybody. And that advice is simply not well informed by the scientific literature if you are a larger person. So, for instance, I weigh 100 kg, so that's about 220 pounds.
Peter Attia: In the first group there was a placebo arm, and then an estrogen only arm. And in the other group there was a progesterone plus estrogen versus a placebo. Everything about the way this study was done is a bit wonky, some of it is justifiable, but it's important to understand first, the women were all way outside of menopause. So none of these women were started when you would normally start HRT, and there are probably several reasons for that. But one of them is, and I think this is a legitimate reason, they wanted hard outcomes, they wanted to know death rates. And if you're doing this on women in their fifty s, you just weren't going to get it right. You couldn't wait too long. Yeah, you got to wait too long. And this was only going to be like a seven to ten year study. So they had to do this on women who were much older. They also disproportionately took much sicker women.

Peter Attia: I believe the prevalence and again, I'm going to get some of these numbers wrong and people are going to get all phosphorylated, but I'm in the ballpark, right? Something like 30, 40% of these women were smokers. The prevalence of obesity, diabetes was enormous. So they really disproportionately picked the most unhealthy population they could. That was pretty advanced in age. And again, I think part of that was to say, look, we want to make sure that after seven years we really know if there's a difference in these causes of death. The other thing is, this is kind of weird, although again, I understand their rationale for it, but this is a great example of be very careful when you look at a clinical trial that it remotely represents the patients you're interested in treating. So they also treated no patients who were symptomatic. The rationale being if we include in the study patients who are symptomatic, those who are randomized to placebo will drop out.

Andrew Huberman: Okay. It makes sense in terms of study design. Makes no sense if the study design is intended to mimic the real world.

Peter Attia: That's right. So now let's just keep track of the three issues. We have a disproportionately unhealthy patient population who are not symptomatic, and we're statins them more than ten years after menopause. The next thing that they did, which again, I understand why they did it, but it's now the fourth strike against this study is and I've spoken with the Pi of the study and asked this question point blank. I'm actually going to have her on my podcast at some point soon. To go over this in more detail is why did you use conjugated equine estrogen, an MPA, which is a synthetic form of progesterone horse. Yes, estrogen. It's horse urine. They collect horse urine. So they're getting the horses do urinate.
Peter Attia: Why don't we just give her estrogen? Because that's clearly going to help with some of the symptoms of menopause. So what do women experience when they go through menopause? The first symptoms are what are called vasomotor symptoms. So this is usually in the form of night sweats, hot flashes, and depending on the woman, this can be really significant. Right? These are women who can have a hard time sleeping. They can be having hot flashes during the middle of the day. They can wake up soaked in a pool of sweat. Those tend to pass after a couple of years, and then they get into sort of the more long term complications of menopause. So what we call vaginal atrophy vaginal dryness. And then the stuff that we talked about a while ago, which is the osteopenia. Osteoporosis. A lot of women will complain, complain of brain fog. Clearly this was an issue and it was recognized 70 years ago, why don't we give women estrogen back to replace that hormone? And so that went on for a couple of decades, maybe less, maybe a decade. And then it was realized, wait a minute, we were driving up the risk of uterine cancer. And the reason for that is if you just give estrogen with no progesterone to antagonize it, you will thicken the endometrium endlessly and you will increase the risk of hyperplasia.

Peter Attia: Well, you'll definitely undergo hyperplasia and then ultimately Dysplasia, dysplasia is precancerous. And ultimately we were seeing that. So people figured out, well, actually, if you want to give estrogen to a woman who still has her uterus, you have to give her progesterone as well. You have to be able to have a hormone to oppose the estrogen. And then that became effectively in the 19 call it the 1970s ish the standard for HRT. So in the early 1990s, the NIH said, look, we haven't really studied this. We have a ton of epidemiology that says giving women hormones seems to be doing really good things. They feel better, so all their symptoms go away. They seem to have lower risk of heart disease, lower risk of cardiovascular risk of cardiovascular disease, lower risk of bone fractures. Everything seems to get better, lower risk of diabetes. But we haven't tested this in a randomized prospective trial. So let's do this. So that became the Whi, and it had two parallel arms. So it had a group for women who did not have a uterus. So these are women that had undergone hysterectomy for some other reason. And then it had a group for women that did have their uterus.
Andrew Huberman: When Robert Sapolski came on the podcast, we talked a little bit about menopause and the data around menopause. He's very interested in these findings that I think I'm going to get this right, that whether or not women benefit from estrogen therapy to offset menopause really depends on when that therapy is initiated. I don't know if you're aware of those data, but he claimed that if they begin estrogen therapy in the middle to tail end of menopause, the outcomes can be quite bad. Whereas if they initiate those estrogen therapies as they enter menopause or even before menopause, then the outcomes can be quite good. I don't know what percentage of the patients you treat are male versus female and what ages those patients are, of course, but what are your thoughts about estrogen therapy for women, menopause and hormone therapies? Generally for women, maybe even testosterone therapy. You hear about that these days and then we'll talk about men.

Peter Attia: So our practice is probably 70 30 male female. So we have lots of women. And this is a very important topic. It's also probably let me think. I just want to make sure I'm not being hyperbolic when I say this. Yeah, I don't think I am. It's hands down the biggest screw up of the entire medical field in the last 25 years. Now, again, it's possible in the next hour I'll think of, no, there's a bigger screw up, another giant screw up, but I don't think I will. I'm pretty confident that I won't be able to think of a bigger act of incompetence than what happened with the Women's Health Initiative in the late ninety s and early 2000s, which is effectively the study that turned the entire medical field off hormone replacement therapy for women. So it's important, I think, to explain what this study looked at. So this was a study that was conducted in response to the widely held belief in the that women should be placed on hormones as they're going through menopause. Right.

Peter Attia: Menopause is I guess maybe I'll even take a step back. I don't know how much your audience is familiar with how estrogen progesterone work. Is it worth going into that stuff?

Andrew Huberman: Probably worth mentioning a bit of the top contour. Some of them might be familiar with it. We've done episodes on estrogen testosterone, but frankly, as I think back to those, we didn't really go into the biology of estrogen testosterone enough.
Peter Attia: Now, the data I've seen on Modafinil suggests that it only really provides a nootropic benefit in someone who is deprived of sleep. Is there data that in a totally well rested person there is a no tropic benefit of modafinil?

Andrew Huberman: I don't know. I have one experience with Armodafinil where I took a half a recommended doses, was prescribed by a doctor. I went to give a talk this is in Hawaii. And 4 hours into the talk, my co speaker came up to me and just said, well, first of all, you got a little bit of spit in the corner of your mouth. And second of all, you haven't blinked in three minutes. And third, there's only two people left in the audience. I was so lasered in that I kind of forgot the context. I'm a little bit of a kind of a tunnel vision, OCD type anyway, but that was all it took. I never took any more of it. It was a powerful stimulant. I take 300 milligrams of alpha GPC now and again before some cognitive work, sometimes before workouts. And I do subjectively feel that it narrows my focus in a nice way, but I don't take it more than once or twice a day and more than once or twice a week.

Peter Attia: This is an example of where, you know how we're talking about exercise versus sort of nutrition and supplements for longevity. I think there may be a whole bunch of things that are kind of interesting around focus, but nothing would compare to changing our environment. I think that if I compare my focus today to my focus when I was in college, there's no comparison. Like in college, I was truly a robot. But I think a large part of it was there was no distraction. There's no email, there's no social media there's no internet. I mean, I was in college when Mosaic launched in the early ninety s and you had to walk like a mile to get to the computer lab on a big sun workstation to do anything in some computer code language. So when you're sitting in your room studying, there was no distraction. And I think that's a far greater component of what it means to be focused than the challenges we have today. So my thoughts on this would be if we really wanted to return to a state of focus, we're going to have to individually do something about our environment.

Peter Attia: I don't know what the answer is. I've tried every little trick I can think of, like closing my browsers when I'm writing and stuff, but I'm just not strong enough willed. I'll pick up my phone every 20 minutes to look and see if I missed a text message or something stupid.

Andrew Huberman: That's pretty infrequent. I did an episode on habits and looking at the data, it seems that people are getting interrupted or interrupting themselves about once every three minutes in the typical workplace. Now that typical has changed with a lot more people working at home. I do put my phone away when I try and work, that nothing focuses me like a deadline. A little bit of fear based urgency. That's it. Grant deadlines, drop deadlines. As I call the Drive podcast, we're going to record today that nothing works quite like it, but such is life. Well, thanks for that offshoot about nicotine. Again, you're not recommending it? I'm not recommending it, but it's clear that augmenting the Acetylcholine system, which is what nicotine does in its various forms and some related type pharmacology, does enhance focus and pretty potently. So I think it's going to be an interesting area for real clinical trials and things of that sort. Love to chat about hormone therapies and hormones generally.
Peter Attia: It's like, oh, God. So the short answer is, I think this stuff is absolutely a concentration enhancing substance. It is addictive, and people need to be wary of that now. It's not addictive to everybody. I personally experience no addiction to it whatsoever. So I could do it every day for 30 days and stop and experience no withdrawal. I could forget about it. It doesn't really seem to matter. You have to be careful with the dose, truthfully. I mean, remember, one cigarette is about 1 nicotine, and a lot of these lozenges will plow four to eight milligrams into you in one shot. And for someone who is naive to that, like I am, four milligrams is a lot of nicotine in one bolus, so you just have to be very mindful of it. I got a lot of flak when I did this AMA for obvious reasons, but people were like, how can you as a doctor, encourage people to use nicotine and I was like, first of all, I'm not encouraging anybody to use it. I just want to be able to talk about the biochemistry of it. And if disclosing that I use it from time to time is an endorsement, then I apologize for that. But on the list of things that you can do to make your brain a little more focused, I would consider this infinitely safer than what a lot of people are doing, which is using stimulants.

Peter Attia: To me, I just tell patients outright like, we are under no circumstance prescribing stimulants. Yeah, we're not giving anybody Adderall. We're not giving anybody Vivance or any of these things. Not to say they don't have an inappropriate clinical use, but they should be prescribed under the care of somebody who's really monitoring the use case for it. And using that as a tool to enhance concentration and cognitive performance is not something we're comfortable doing.

Andrew Huberman: Yeah, it's rampant on college campuses. I can only imagine our modafinil modafinil, which are slightly different, of course. So non clinical use, not prescribed for ADHD, but just it's rampant recreational use, study based use.
Andrew Huberman: And I asked him why, and he said, because in his estimation, it's protective against Parkinson's and Alzheimer's, or at least the nicotinic acetylcholine augmentation of nicotine, because nicotine is acetylcholine receptor, obviously is known to create a state of focus and neural enhancement. What are your thoughts about not smoking? Let's just be really clear. People don't smoke nicotine. Vape nicotine, it's going to shorten your life. Just terrible idea, addictive, et cetera, in my opinion. But what are your thoughts about augmenting acetylcholine through the use of nicotine in order to keep the brain healthspan. Healthspan and focused. Again, this is one Nobel Prize winner, so it's truly N of one. But he's so convinced that this matches up with the mechanistic data on acetylcholine and cognition that I'd love to hear your thoughts on it.

Peter Attia: So I can't speak to the ad prevention component of it. I'd have to run that by a couple of my colleagues who I collaborate with on that, but I can definitely speak to the cognitive enhancement piece of it. And I actually did an AMA on this probably a year ago, where I went into all of the gory details of it and talked about my own use of nicotine, which I'll cycle on and off. I've been doing it for the last ten years.

Andrew Huberman: What form do you take it in?

Peter Attia: I used to use the gum. I don't like the gum anymore, so now I like these little lozenges. I'll tell you a funny story about this. So our mutual acquaintance David Sinclair mentioned a company to me a year ago. He's like, hey, have you heard of this company? And I forget the name of the company, but he gave me some name. So I go online and it's like, this company selling nicotine. And I'm like, I wonder why he's asking me to do this. Well, I'll just order a bunch, and then we'll figure out why. Because there was some reason we were doing this, potentially through an investment. So I get up literally ordered, like, a lifetime supply of this stuff, and it's pretty good. It's a really nice little patch, because the thing I didn't like about the gum was I hated just the taste of it. So then the next week, I'm talking to David and I'm like, by the way, I ordered all that nicotine stuff you told me about. He's like, what? And he goes, oh, the company's name was something else. It was totally unrelated.
Andy Galpin: It may just be that's how you're built, right? The same could be true for a squat. The high bar versus low bar. Sort of example we talked about earlier, you can see plenty of evidence on muscle activation studies where people even doing the vertical back squat style have tendons glute activation and folks doing the low bar have tremendous quad activation. So a lot of it depends on personal mechanics. So what I counted is the question really you just have to ask yourself, number one, do you really care that much? You know you have a range to get to. If you were anywhere between ten to 25 working sets, you know you're fine. So if you count it or don't count it, it's just going to change the difference between whether you did 17 working sets or 23 andy, either way you're fine. So I don't really care. Number two, are you actually feeling anything there? So if you're doing your chin ups and your biceps are blowing up, I'm counting that.

Andy Galpin: If you're doing it and you're like, no, I don't feel any fatigue there, then I'd probably say, okay, we're not going to count that as towards. So you can just let that guide you a little bit towards your count. Yeah.

Andrew Huberman: I've always noticed that there are certain muscle groups that are very easy to isolate when under load. And those are almost always the same muscle groups that are easy to contract very hard without any load whatsoever.

Andy Galpin: Bingo. You know, that's actually really insightful. So you can kind of use this heuristic of like if you can contract your lats just standing here, you're probably going to contract them very well when you lift. If you can't, you can probably assume about the same thing is going to happen. So, yeah, you'll know, the lats are actually really interesting because they tend to be one of the more difficult muscle groups to learn how to activate. So if you're in your journey and you're just like, I have no idea, Andy, you can look up like a lat pose. So how do you puff your lats out? How do you show it? And if you do that and you're like, wow, there's no movement here, just recognize that's extremely common. And it's probably going to take you many, many months of trying before you start to see some movements and probably even a few years before you really start to see activation. So you're not some sort of specific special genetic anomaly. It's very, very common.
Andrew Huberman: If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and Apple, and on both Spotify and Apple. You can leave us up to a five star review. If you have questions for us, or comments or suggestions about topics you'd like us to cover or guests you'd like me to include on the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comments section on YouTube. We do read all the comments. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and during today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. I'd also like to inform you about the Huberman Lab podcast free newsletter. It's called the Neural Network newsletter, and each month the Neural Network newsletter is sent out. Andy it contains summaries of podcast episodes, specific protocols discussed on the Huberman Lab podcast, all in fairly concise format. Andy all completely zero cost.

Andrew Huberman: You can sign up for the Neural Network newsletter by going to Hubermanlab.com, go to the menu and click on newsletter. You provide us your email. We do not share it with anybody. And as I mentioned before, it's completely zero cost. By going to Hubermanlab.com, you can also go into the menu tab and go to newsletter and see some example newsletters from months past. Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion about fitness, exercise and performance with Dr. Andy Galpin. And as always, thank you for your interest in science.
Andy Galpin: Creatine monohydrate is still the best one, and that's just because it has the largest evidence base. You can maybe make some arguments for some other types, but you're really going to reach saturation pretty quickly within a matter of weeks in there at a dosage of anywhere between, like, three to 6 grams per day. Now, 5 grams is the very standard number we give. Reality is, I change that number based on size. That's just the honest truth. If you're 225, you're not going to get the same dosage of Creatine as 125 pound girl. This is not what we're going to do. So we may slide that number down a little bit closer to three for the smaller girl, boy, it doesn't matter. It's just physical size. If you're one of our 275 or 330 pound offensive right tackles in the NFL, you're not going to get the same dosage as everybody else. So that number is going to go up to seven, eight, nine, maybe even 10 grams a day. So that's just kind of a scale in general. If you wanted an easy answer, 5.

Andrew Huberman: Grams is the standard taken after training.

Andy Galpin: The timing doesn't matter. Totally irrelevant. Take it in the morning, breakfast, take it at night, take it anytime you want. Take it pre. We tend to put it in a lot of people's workout, shakes just to make sure they get it in throughout the day, but the timing is irrelevant.

Andrew Huberman: Great. Well, thank you for that very informative answer, and I look forward to much more discussion about nutrition and supplementation, andy recovery and all the rest in the episodes to come. This was incredibly informative. Thank you so very much.

Andy Galpin: I appreciate the opportunity. I had a great time doing that. I love talking about these things. I also really like talking about what we're going to get into in our next conversation, which is the physiology of endurance, metabolism and fat loss.
Andrew Huberman: Supplementation is a huge topic and one that we will go into in great depth in a soon to occur episode. But if you had to pick one supplement that can benefit most everybody, if not everybody, for their training directed toward strength, power and hypertrophy, what would that supplement be and how would you like to see people use it? Meaning how much should they take and when should they take it?

Andy Galpin: Sure, if you don't count protein and carbohydrates as supplements, they technically are, but we'll just walk out of it, right?

Andrew Huberman: Sorry, I should be more specific. I'm not referring to non food form protein and carbohydrates. So powdered protein and powdered, carbohydrate, et cetera, technically are supplements. They're highly processed, but I'm not including that. I'm referring to non macronutrient type supplements.

Andy Galpin: Yeah. Does testosterone count?

Andrew Huberman: Well, in the context of this discussion, it's testosterone that people are manufacturing themselves.

Andy Galpin: Okay. The cheating kind, the endogenous kind. No, I mean, Creatine is the answer here, without question. It is the most well studied, it is the most effective. Andy its benefits are robust, meaning they are going to confer positive adaptations across multiple physiological domains. We could certainly have a very long chat about some of the interesting things that people in fact, we just had Darren Candau on Barbara Shrugged podcast, and he went into extensive detail about all the benefits of Creatine that people have no idea about, including things like bone mineral density. You asked about that earlier. Creatine is actually fairly effective for that, let alone the benefit in things like cognitive function, decision making, memory, the work that's being done there for neurological disorders, depression, a whole host of things that Creatine is being studied for. Some of those studies show a lot of benefits. Some of it show maybe a little bit, some none. But there's just a lot of things Creatine can do. So when we could talk about muscle recovery or muscle hypertrophy, that's where the bulk of the research is, and it's very effective in terms of type.
Andy Galpin: In general. The way that we like to think about this is if you're doing a strength type of work where you're truly targeting that, then a one to one post exercise, protein to carbohydrate ratio is generally what we're going to go after. So this would be something like 35 grams of protein. Andy 35 grams of carbohydrate. It doesn't have to be post, it can be pre or my favorite is actually mid or post, but somewhere in that range, especially if you're training in the morning and you have not consumed anything prior to your workout.

Andrew Huberman: And that's not necessarily eating in the middle of the workout, that's drinking calories. I have to see someone eating a sandwich in the gym, although I'm sure it's happened.

Andy Galpin: So one to one, is that like sort of standard number here? If you're going to do sort of more of a really hard conditioning workout. That number slides up to something like three or even four to one, which would be carbohydrate to protein ratio. So if we want to stay at 35 grams of protein, we're going to go maybe as high as like 100 or 140 grams of carbohydrate. Again, depending on what type of training we're sort of doing. If you're going to do a little bit of a combination then like a little bit of strength, a little bit of conditioning and kind of a standard workout, which is probably something that a lot of people will do, then you maybe want to go to something like two to one. So 35 grams of protein, 60, 70 grams of carbohydrate, and those are kind of just like rough numbers that you can go by.

Andrew Huberman: And for pure hypertrophy training, would you like to see people ingest some carbohydrate post training?

Andy Galpin: For pure hypertrophy training, I want to see that as many of those nutrients around the training as generally possible. Now again, I may change my mind when our fasting study comes out, but as it stands now, there is no advantage to not fueling around the training and there are some known and some other potential advantages to fueling. So I just see no reason to not do it. In fact, most people are generally going to do better. Now, this is not science, this is just my coaching experience and this is with our athletes and all of our non athletes that we've worked with and do work with. They're just going to be better spreading those meals out generally throughout the day. And they're going to be better if they have those nutrients either pre, mid or post. And so they're going to get, even for hypertrophy, they're going to get something like that. One three to one ratio of carbs to protein. Personal preference. Some people don't like to eat before they train. Some people have to eat before they train. Some people can't put in food in their belly immediately after work around that you can play based on personal preference. But we want that fueling in there because we want to maximize the potential growth and we want to just get a jump start in recovery because we're going to be training again pretty soon.
Andrew Huberman: I'd like to talk a little bit about nutrition and supplementation as it relates to hypertrophy. Dr. Lane Norton, who's been a guest on the Huberman Lab podcast andy, we both know throughout a number range related to protein intake, on the backdrop of how much protein synthesis can occur by meal, across the day, et cetera. Lot of research done there. Andy some important work by him in particular. And then the value that he threw out was 1.6 grams/kg of body weight. Being the lower end of the range up to I believe it was as high as 2.4, maybe even as high as 2.7 grams of protein per kilogram of body weight per day. That's a pretty broad range. But it's on the higher end of what I think most people think of in terms of protein intake. And then again, some people might already be right there or maybe even above that value. Of course, this all depends on whether or not people are omnivore, vegan, meat based, et cetera. We won't even go there. But assuming people are getting enough protein per day. So somewhere in that range and they are spreading out that protein intake to accommodate the fact that the body can only assimilate a certain amount of protein in any given sitting.

Andrew Huberman: What do you like to see people ingest at some point? Post hypertrophy inducing workout in order to get the protein synthesis advantage, if you will, that is stimulated by that workout? Earlier you mentioned the post training feeding window that in the probably earlier people were talking about. Oh, within the first 90 minutes you have to get 30 amounts for a while. Was it 30 minutes of excuse me, a certain number of grams of carbohydrate and protein, et cetera. I think now the understanding is that that window is much broader. Andy how broad, et cetera, is still a matter of debate. But when somebody is training specifically for hypertrophy, assuming they are getting enough protein from quality sources in their other meals, andy assuming that their overall macronutrient intake and caloric intake is high enough, that is, they have enough of a caloric surplus that they have the raw materials for hypertrophy.

Andrew Huberman: What do you like to see people ingest at some point post workout in order to facilitate muscle protein synthesis and recovery? And this could include nutrition and supplementation. Or if you want to divide those answers out, feel free to do so.
Andy Galpin: You've put in a stressor in now you've blocked that stress. You've literally blocked the signal that tells your body, come back and grow larger size. So not a good idea to do it if you're training for some other purposes. Maybe strength, maybe there's an argument there, although maybe not for speed and power. Maybe you can get away with it. Endurance may be a separate conversation. If you're in season, I have no problem using it immediately after a game. The goal is entirely different. Even if we did a hypertrophy type of training program, we're not doing it to try to maximize growth. In that particular case, our priority for recovery is higher than our priority for muscle growth. So we choose optimization in that category. You can only make those choices, though, when you truly understand what is the goal. For the day, the week, the month, the phase of training, and really what part of the year you're in. We have that all plotted out for all the people we work with. So I know when we want to choose one over the other, this is the choice you always make situation.

Andy Galpin: That's not how we operate. We need more precision than that. So that being said, we're generally not going to do it. If we want to do a lot of Icing during a phase in which we're using a lot of hypertrophy, we're going to do a couple of things. Number one, we may just not use it. So there are phases in our training where I don't want to maximize recovery. I'm not going to give you any tricks here. I'm not going to do ice or any of the other methods. We're going to talk about why, because the whole point is to cause overload. That's what's going to be the stimuli to cause adaptation. If all I'm doing is blocking that stuff attenuating it, smashing it back down, I'm undercutting myself. I'm choosing to feel a little bit better, to have a little bit better performance right now, knowing that's going to compromise the results. I'm going to get 6810 twelve weeks from now. So I'm not going to choose it at all. And the reality of it is, if I really am trying to maximize hypertrophy, I'm probably not doing any ice work during that whole phase.

Andy Galpin: Maybe like my off day. I know that's similar to a setup. You have like one day a week when I'm not training. We'll jump in some ice, maybe even do some hot cold contrast. I love the Xpt protocol. We've probably talked about it before. That's a great set up. Or just not do it at all. It's just not something we need when we move into another phase of training where we're trying to maximize adaptation or maximize the result. Andy get the benefit of that training now. We're going to hedge more towards recovery and we're going to bring in some of these strategies and techniques and not worry about causing the most stimuli there because we're trying to attenuate because we're trying to actualize the work we did 6810 twelve weeks before.

Andrew Huberman: What about cold showers? Do those have the same hypertrophy blunting effect in general?

Andy Galpin: No, in general you can do cold showers. That's not going to be a problem. You're not going to be in there very long, and you're not going to get nearly as cold as you will submerge in 30 degree ice water the way that we do it, nonetheless. So I have no problem standing in the shower for a couple of minutes using it for other reasons if you want to. That's no issue.
Andrew Huberman: Now, I realized that we are going to do entire episodes related to nutrition, supplementation, recovery, et cetera, but I'd like to just touch on two or three specific topics and questions that come up a lot around the question of hypertrophy specifically, and that probably also relate to strength training and training for speed. So I'm going to ask these in not rapid fire, sure, but I'll give.

Andy Galpin: You shorter answers, we'll put it that way.

Andrew Huberman: So I will ask these questions now, but with the caveat that we will get into these topics in much more depth very soon. The first question is about the use of cold showers and ice baths and cold water exposure, which I know many people use for resilience training to increase their dopamine, which it does, and for recovery. But there's also this issue of when one should use cold, that is deliberate cold exposure relative to hypertrophy training specifically. And that's because I've heard that if deliberate cold exposure is done too soon after a hypertrophy adaptation inducing workout, all the sorts of things we've been talking about, that the hypertrophy response can be blunted reduced or eliminated. Is that true? And if so, when could people do deliberate cold exposure while still also including hypertrophy training in their program and still get hypertrophy?

Andy Galpin: Great. So, you know, I'm a lover of the cold. I still have a deep freezer in my house that is filled with water at all times that I've plugged in and is a frozen chamber. I still do the old school style of it.

Andrew Huberman: Please unplug it before you get in it each time.

Andy Galpin: Yes, absolutely. And then don't do it by yourself so that the lid can close on top of you and then we don't see you sort of ever again.

Andrew Huberman: Again. The Han Solo effect.

Andy Galpin: It's time for me to upgrade and get one of these new fancy ones. But I've been using this for so many years, so I love it. Obviously, I've been involved with Xpt, andy Gabby, Andy Laird and Brian Mackenzie and these folks. So I've been doing this stuff for a long time, I don't even know how many hundreds of folks into the ice and a lot of reasons. So there are a lot of benefits, and we could talk about those later. However, that being said, it is very, very true. You do not want to get in the ice post hypertrophy training. You wouldn't want to do that immediately after the workout. You probably don't want to do it before the workout, and you probably don't even want to do it that same day. It's just not worth it. It will blunt hypertrophy. And specifically we've talked earlier about what's driving muscle growth is that signaling cascade through that gene, expression through that muscle, protein synthesis. Cold exposure blocks that signal. Remember, adaptation comes from stress.
Andrew Huberman: In terms of sets and repetitions, we briefly touched on this, but anywhere from, I believe, six repetitions all the way up to 30 repetitions, but probably more in the eight to 15 repetition range for hypertrophy most of the time, yeah. And I'll just throw in there because I love this idea that if you want to get a relatively balanced adaptation related to strength and hypertrophy, that seven to nine range. The no man's or no woman's land of training repetitions.

Andy Galpin: I always joke in class, I'm like, okay, we go through the whole thing, right? You're like, one to five, strength, eight to twelve hypertrophy, and you're like, great, and then I'm like, okay, so six to nine means nothing will happen at all. The kids are just like writing it down, right?

Andrew Huberman: A good way for everybody to remember that there are adaptations triggered in the six to nine rep range, and it's a balance of strength and height.

Andy Galpin: You'll just get thrown out of any gym that I'm a part of.

Andrew Huberman: Fantastic if you do that. But the important point is to get close to failure and occasionally hit failure, maybe occasionally throw in a forced repetition or a rest pause where you rest and then do a few more, something like that. But those intensity creatine maneuvers will require a little bit more attention to recovery either time or attention in some other way.

Andy Galpin: And here's a little bit of carrot I'll throw at people, because people generally don't like to be told to not go to failure that often, right? So there's a handful of like half the folks are like, sweet, I don't have to train that hard to get there. And those folks, it's like, well, yes, but I also said you just can't do a half workout. You have to get pretty darn close to failure, and most people don't really know what failure means. So for that group, it's still probably harder than you think. You want to train the other group, though, that wants to completely blow themselves out every single time. Dragging them back is more the key. Now for those folks, here's what I can say. If you make sure that your hidden stressors, invisible stressors, are completely taken care of, you can go to failure a lot more often. And so you need to dial those things in. And then now you can go hammer yourself because you'll recover so much quicker. And we see this very commonly in all of our programs with our athletes, Andy, our non athletes.
Andy Galpin: Speed and power stuff is so light, it almost requires because it's non fatiguing, it requires almost no recovery. So if you are truly doing, say, like when you say it's funny because when you say, I do legs on Mondays, you don't even realize it. But an athlete does legs every day, right? But you're saying legs, and what you're really saying is, I do hypertrophy legs Mondays.

Andrew Huberman: Pretty much. I don't want to get into what I do specifically because it's less important than what other people choose to implement. But the repetition ranges anywhere from four to twelve. Correct.

Andy Galpin: You're smack dead in the peak soreness longest recovery range.

Andrew Huberman: Volume is relatively low, intensity is very, very high, workouts are very, very short.

Andy Galpin: So if you were to switch that, Andy, you were to stay under four repetitions, higher quality, higher rest in between them, I would be willing to bet a large amount of money that you'd be fine the next day, certainly 48 hours. And if you were to actually go way lower and keep three to five and keep it very, very light and trained for speed, you would have absolutely no issue the next day. So it really comes down to a function of training you're right in that hypertrophy zone, which is something that you probably need 48 hours at minimum to recover from. Because what you won't see are bodybuilders training the same muscle group on multiple days, like very often. At most it would be indirect, but generally they're not going to do that every single day for the same reason. So you're training in that style. That's what it's going to take to recover. If you trained in a different style, then it wouldn't take that long to recover.

Andrew Huberman: So for the person starting out, would you recommend they pick three to five exercise science stick with those so that they can get their skill and movement and positioning andy breathing, all that really dialed in and then start to experiment by varying one or two of those exercises over time.
Andrew Huberman: If somebody is more focused on strength as opposed to power, what are the additional variables they should consider? Again, within the context of this overarching theme of choice, order, volume, frequency and progression, absolutely.

Andy Galpin: It's almost identical with a couple of small exceptions. Number one, you probably can't do as many working sets per week for strength because now you're introducing a heavier load and that's going to represent some sort of fatigue load on the tissue, all those things. So you could probably get away with doing 20 sets of two of a vertical jump four or five times a week. You probably couldn't do that at a 90% on squat. Right. So the total amount of sets and the total amount of weekly load you can get to just needs to be lower and then the intensity, right? So we talked about that needs to be generally higher than 70% with some portion of that being working sets and some portion of that really truly being at 90% plus. Everything else is pretty identical. You still want to emphasize maximum speed despite the fact you may actually not be moving faster because you've introduced load. You still need to be attempting that, but you're going to be picking complex exercises.

Andy Galpin: You're generally going to be hedging more towards barbells andy machines. So this is a case where body weight training can be effective again, particularly for the upper body. But at some point, you're really going to have to move past that because there's just a certain amount of load you can't put on the lower body with just your body weight. You get limited by how much you weigh or, I mean, there's a couple of things you can do, but you're going to run out past that pretty quickly. And so when it comes to strength, they tend to be less athletic movements because we have to have a barbell on us. We have to be on a machine or something like that. And so that's a subtle difference in exercise choice. We need to also be careful about the eccentric portion and things like that where we don't have as much risk in like a speed or power one. So some of the different things you can play with there, we've talked about doing things like pushes and pulls. I also love carries. So a farmer's carry, pushing a sled, dragging a sled, all kinds of things.
Andrew Huberman: You mentioned a few other things that one might consider in light of the list that you provided of choice, order, volume, frequency and progression.

Andy Galpin: Right. So starting off with power, I just wanted to hand the listeners here with a whole bunch of different methods to go play with. So as long as you hit those concepts, the repetition range for power 30% to 70% of your one repetition max depending on the exercise and your training status, you're going to get the power. As long as you're attempting to go fast is going to be great. A lot of things you can try plyometrics are a great example of things that are effective for power development. We've mentioned medicine ball throws, short sprints. You can even do sprints on an air bike, which is a great super safe activity. You can do them from like a rolling start where you kind of like get going a little bit and then you explode for 5 seconds. Andy see how fast you can get. Or a dead start. Both of those are very acceptable weightlifting movements. So snatches and cleaning jerks are tremendously effective.

Andy Galpin: In fact, they are, pound for pound, by far the most effective exercise choice for power development, without question. So those are good ones. Clapping, push ups, speed, squats. These are a whole host of different things that you can do for speed and power development depending on your kettlebell swings. Another great one. All these can be done depending on your preference, exercise availability, what's at your gym or not gym, any of those things.
Andrew Huberman: What about stretching between sets?

Andy Galpin: Yeah, you probably don't want to do that either. There are very clear examples of pre exercise stretching, static stretching, being quite detrimental for maximum power production. The same thing for speed and strength. And that's been shown actually a number of times in a number of laboratories, which is like a classic hallmark any scientist looks for, of really jumping on board with an idea. If it's shown not only multiple times but in multiple laboratories from multiple scientists, and they're all seeing the same thing, you start to get a lot of confidence that that's a real finding. And that's been shown. We've done that in our center for Sport performance. Not myself, but one of my colleagues has done a lot of stretching research and he's seen that a lot on everything from vertical jump to isokinetic dynamometers and force velocity curves. We've seen this in sprinting, we've seen this in speed, we've seen this in loaded stuff. So you don't want to spend a ton of time stretching statically, stretching a muscle prior to if you do that and you have to do that, say for example, you finished, that you're just like feeling really tight.

Andy Galpin: Yeah, go ahead. You need to get in the right position, especially for most people. Where are you willing to sacrifice 10% of power to make sure you don't get hurt? Yes. That answer is almost always yes outside of some very specific athlete scenarios. So if you're not in the right position I actually remember having this conversation with Kelly. Kelly started a long time ago. It was just like, yeah, fine, I'll lose 5%. That means I'm not going to get in a bad position and hurt my back. And I totally, totally agree. So if you got to open up a hip or an ankle or something to get there, get in the right position. Number one, we'll live with the 5% reduction in power. And if you do, just reactivate. So before you go do your working set, go do something fast again, a vertical jump, a short sprint, an acceleration, and sort of get that system cleared back up. If you didn't stretch it for long enough and you didn't hold it for long enough, you should be able to be just fine. So when it comes to hypertrophy, you can really stretch all you want because it's not driven by intensity or outcome, it's being driven by an insult into the tissue. And so if you're pre fatigued for hypertrophy, it doesn't matter.

Andy Galpin: If you're pre stretched, that doesn't matter. We're not going for quality of outcome, we're going for quality of internal signal, which is not going to be changed by your force output. So it doesn't really matter.
Andrew Huberman: I'd like to also just queue up one, which is while I joked about people texting and doing social media between sets, that's not a joke. Well, I confess I stopped bringing my phone into the gym because of the urge to take my mind off of the workout. And I just started enjoying my workouts a lot more and the workouts go far better that way, and they're just much more efficient for me. I realize that some people, their careers take place in the gym, Andy, so I don't look down upon anyone using their phone at the gym, but that really tends to help me. But I do wonder whether or not there's an optimal behavior or mindset in between sets. I've heard before that pacing around can actually help diffuse some of the lactate and other metabolic byproducts of work and exertion that can lead to better performance. I've also heard that shaking the muscles out. I mean, there's all sorts of gym lore about this, but maybe there's also some decent science.

Andrew Huberman: I'm just curious if you have any specific recommendations that people could play with or try.

Andy Galpin: Yep. So for speed and power, you want to walk this balance of stiff but fresh. And so if you were to literally finish a repetition, sit on a bench for five minutes, you would stand up after that, fairly stiff, andy, you wouldn't feel sort of smooth. This is not all non science. This is all practical application. Right.

Andrew Huberman: Anecdata anecdata.

Andy Galpin: There you go. Strength is a little bit different, but it's the same concept. You're walking that line. In general, a lot of the times, if you see powerlifters and weightlifters in between sets, they're going to sit down and not move for hypertrophy can be a little bit different because you're getting towards fatigue. And so the factors you mentioned, like clearing lactate well, first of all, lactate is not actually causing fatigue. That's a giant myth, which is why.

Andrew Huberman: I teed it up. No, I'm just kidding.

Andy Galpin: But in the case of, again, speed, Andy, power, you're not going to fatigue. So fatigue management is not really an issue. You want to make sure that you're getting complete neurological recovery, which is a little bit slower than muscle energetically. You're not out of any gas whatsoever. Right. You are not in a lack of fuel. Doing three repetitions of a vertical jump.

Andrew Huberman: No club, plenty of glycogen.

Andy Galpin: Totally.
Andy Galpin: Correct. You don't really have to go that long. In fact, there was actually a study that came out in the last month that showed like, really two minutes is probably sufficient for most people. Having said that, if you really are trying to push maximum strength adaptations, like three to five is very reasonable. Those training sessions are long because you're spending more time not doing anything than you are doing something, but you're trying to maximize quality. So that's just sort of like part Andy Parcel. If you're not super worried about it, you can actually do supersets, which is, let's imagine again, you're going to do some lunges and while your legs are resting, doing their three to five minutes, you can go over and do an upper body row or pull. And when your upper body is resting, you're going back to legs. So that really cuts your time in half. Is it ideal? No.

Andy Galpin: We actually ran a study maybe ten years ago in our lab, and we looked at that specifically and we did see a reduction in strength performance in the supersetting group relative to the group who did not superset. The question. Then it becomes like, is it enough for you to care? So if I were to say, hey, I can cut an hour off of your workout time but you will lose 5% of your strength gain, almost everyone would take that exchange with the exception of people who are getting close to competition or really trying to set a new lifetime PR or something. Then you might say, no, I don't want any interference there. That last little margin is what I care about. Give me the extra rest. Great. So does it work? Does it not work? It's always, what are you willing to give up versus get the practicalities of.

Andrew Huberman: Supersets or staggering push, pull, push, pull, in my mind are real because you have to take over large segments of the gym which oftentimes leads to a situation where your rest times are too long or highly variable because people are working in.

Andy Galpin: Or you can't finish your set because now someone jumped into the machine, totally screwed.

Andrew Huberman: You lose three to five of your friends because it's obnoxious when you're taking over all the equipment. But in all seriousness, I think it's wonderful if you have the space andy the format to do it. But at least in my experience and observation, these people know who they are. It's not practical to do on a regular basis if you train in an open commercial gym.

Andy Galpin: Yeah, tough to pull off. So we've covered choice, order, volume and intensity to a sufficient level. The last one is frequency, and we've already sort of indirectly talked about that where frequency can be as high as you'd like in this area. It really depends on your recovery. If you're really, truly pushing maximum strength you probably do need a few days to recover although that's dependent upon you. But speed and power can be done multiple times a day, almost every day. Basically the one exception would be maximum sprinting speed. You need to be careful, therefore things like hamstring and injury, especially if you're pretty fast. So you want to be a little bit cautious of that. But if you're doing easier movements like medicine ball throws or kettlebell swings or something, you could do those quite often as long as the volume is staying pretty low. Last little piece here is progression. How do I progress over time? So I mentioned this earlier, but just want to fill this gap right back in before we head over to hypertrophy which is three to 5% increase per week of intensity.

Andy Galpin: In general, Andy, you can do upwards of about 5% increase in volume per week over time. And I generally recommend running that for at longest eight weeks. But probably most realistically you want to go about five weeks or so and then have some sort of a deload or back off week if you do that, you're generally going to be a pretty good spot. So those are like the core concepts. Now, there's a whole bunch of fun methods you can play with within all these categories, Andy. I would like to actually cover just a couple of them if we've got a little more space for that.

Andrew Huberman: Sure, I'd love to hear about those.
Andy Galpin: Three to five is what I told you earlier. Right. I'm just saying, like, sometimes you can actually go quite higher in cases, but that's the general range.

Andrew Huberman: And once somebody finishes the three by five workout for power or strength, if they decide they want to throw in some calf raises and curls and totally a forearm work or a little bit of jogging on the treadmill or something, that's okay. Absolutely.

Andy Galpin: You have very little risk of interference for things like speed and power. Strength, you have a little bit of a risk only because now you're introducing fatigue, which if you're really pushing strength, that might compromise your recovery.

Andrew Huberman: I could imagine doing the three to five routine for strength or for power, and then somebody finishing up with ten or 15 minutes of hypertrophy arm work and then being very seriously compromised if they try and come in the next day or even the next day.

Andy Galpin: Correct.

Andrew Huberman: And do those big compound movements for speed. Andy power.

Andy Galpin: That's right.

Andrew Huberman: Not just because they're sore, but the muscles may actually still be damaged. And I know later we're going to talk about the somewhat tenuous relationship between soreness and recovery.

Andy Galpin: Yeah. So that's a really nice heuristic to pay attention to, is you can but just be careful. Energy starts to matter at that point. If you're really, truly trying to maximize strength, you would do nothing at all outside of that training. If you're just like, I kind of want to get stronger and some other things, and you're willing to lose strength, 5% of your strength gains, then you're totally fine. The same can be said, by the way, for supersetting. So supersetting is an idea that says, like, wait a minute, you're telling me, dude, I got to take five minutes in between each set?

Andrew Huberman: Well, that's not so much a problem nowadays with phone, with smartphones, because people are filling their intersect intervals with social media and texting.
Andrew Huberman: I can easily think of a push in a pull. So, for example, bench press or shoulder press, row or chin for pull and then squat or deadlift for hinge. What would be a good example of a quality rotational movement?

Andy Galpin: Yes. So anytime you can use a cable machine, like at the gym, and you can do it's kind of hard to describe this exercise, but basically you're going to stand facing the cable and you're going to pull it towards yourself and then rotate like you're pivoting, like you're either swinging a golf club or hitting a baseball bat. So you're facing one direction. I'm facing you right now. I'm pulling the cable towards myself. And then I'm going to spin, do a 180 degree pivot and face exactly away from you when I finish and then return it back to that same spot. So that's a rotation.

Andrew Huberman: Great. We will provide a link to an example of that that you consider a.

Andy Galpin: Quality example, a medicine ball throw. Any number of things like this are a great rotational exercise. All right? So we select our exercises based on that. We generally then, because of that is the case, we don't worry about things like eccentric versus concentric because you're generally doing a whole body athletic movement which the eccentric concentric portion is going to be folded into that and you really can't separate them out. So that's exercise choice. Our first variable. The next one is exercise order. So because everything driving power andy strength is quality based, you want to do these at the beginning of your workout. You would not want to do anything fatiguing before this. So no cardiovascular training, no other repetition to failure stuff. If you do those before and now you're slower, all you've done is practice getting slower. These need to be done when you're fresh. You also need to do them when you're very fresh because they are the most neurologically demanding.

Andy Galpin: They're complicated, they tend to have multiple steps and they're often in multiple planes. And coordination is a difficult thing. And if you're trying to do all that at maximum speed, your nervous system needs to be tremendously fresh. So any amount of fatigue here is only going to compromise results to kind of recap. That one of the major mistakes when training for strength Andy, especially power, is people worry way too much about fatigue. Those things should not be part of the equation. In fact, if they are, that's a very good sign you're not doing this correctly. These are non fatiguing movements, especially speed and power. So choice order is next. The next one after that is volume. And we sort of hit volume and intensity, which is the other one we talked about, that the volume is basically identical between power and strength. The general number we're going to look at here is something like three to 20 sets total per workout? Per workout. But that would be like 20 would be a little bit of a special case.
Andrew Huberman: So before we dive into our discussion about hypertrophy, can we just get a brief recap of the general parameters for an excellent power andy strength training program?

Andy Galpin: Okay, let me hit you with these rapid fire, and then you can maybe come ask questions along that. Remember those modifiable variables. So let's go through them in order and then what they mean specifically for power versus strength. So modifiable variables, number one is called choice. So which exercises do I select for strength in general? For power or speed or strength, we want to select compound movements. You don't often see people doing maximum strength work for, like, a tricep kickback, right? It's typically multiple joint movements and typically complex movements. In selecting these compound movements, we generally want to actually think about exercise selection of movements rather than muscle groups. So this is an important distinction because we'll see this is a different answer when we get to hypertrophy. What I mean by that is, when we think about, again, strength training, we tend to think about bodybuilding concepts.

Andy Galpin: We go to the gym and we do things like, I got to make sure I get my chest today, and I got to make sure I get my hamstrings. Now you're selecting exercises based on a muscle. You want to work for strength development and power. We want to think about movements rather than individual muscle groups. So there should be, like, things like, I need to train explosive hip extension, which is like a vertical jump or something like that. I want to train pushing or pulling movements, or I want to train rotation, which is a whole area we haven't gotten into, which is very important for overall health and wellness longevity. So we want to select big movements by the muscle, the movement patterns that we want to introduce, and we just want to select a reasonable balance between these. I don't care what the exact ratio is. You just don't want to go an entire six months without doing anything in this rotational area or an entire eight to ten weeks without doing something that's a lower body hinge, right? So any number of examples there. So just think about the rough movement patterns, upper and lower push, andy pull, and then some sort of rotation that puts you in a pretty good spot if you're using three by five method, and you're going to pick as little as three exercises, just pick one from each one of those groups.

Andy Galpin: Pick a rotation, pick a push, and pick a pull.
Andy Galpin: That's great if you look at the conjugate model. So these are the strongest power lifters as a collective group that ever existed. What they're very good at is they keep almost the exact same weekly structure, but they make a very small change in exercise variation. So for example, say Wednesday is bench day, right? They're going to always bench on Wednesdays, but maybe this week they're going to do closed grip bench and then maybe next week it's going to be maybe a special type of barbell andy then maybe the week after that maybe they'll change the range of motion a little bit. So it's actually the exact same exercise where they're making a very small variation and that change alone allows them to do enough specificity, but also gives them enough variation to where it's not the exact same stimuli in the exact same spot over and over and over. And that's what allows that group, plus lots of other assistants, but it's what allows that group to train very, very heavy, very consistently. Andy not have to worry about too much planning for periodization and other stuff like that.

Andy Galpin: They get their back off by making small variations in exercise. I will say a major mistake folks do make is they change their exercises entirely way too often. If I were to have to pick one or the other, I would say don't change anything on your exercises for six weeks, probably realistic, maybe even ten to twelve weeks, and then you can make some changes. You should not be changing every single week. You're not going to see progress. It's going to be very difficult to do that. So it's going to take you three weeks generally to figure out the groove of the exercise, to figure out how well you can load it what's too much to where you woke up unbelievably sore that was a train wreck. How much do I load it at what position? How long is this going to take? It's going to take you three or so weeks and then you can really start.

Andy Galpin: Pushing there, so changing it before that or in that time frame, you're not going to be able to progressively overload because you're just not going to know exactly where you're at on all the exercises. So it's very important to create standardization within them and then see some progress in a movement or a muscle group, whatever you're going for, and then make some changes.
Andy Galpin: A yoke walk, all kinds of carry modalities that are very, very effective for strength. There's eccentric overload training, which we really haven't gotten into, but it's a really advanced technique where you can actually load at greater than 100% of your one repetition max, but you're only going to do the eccentric portion of it. So physiologically, you are much stronger eccentrically than you are concentrically for a variety of muscle tissue reasons, actually. And so imagine if you can do a bench press at 200, and what you might actually do is load it to 220, and you would have a spotter andy, maybe even use it in a rack, and you would lower it down, under control all the way to the bottom, and then stop. Your friends would lift it back up the top. Andy. Then you just practice that eccentric portion. You would actually be able to lower, say, 220 effectively, despite the fact that you wouldn't have been able to lift it back up.

Andy Galpin: You don't need to start there, but that is a very effective method for increase. In fact, one of my doctoral students right now is doing a project on this at USC, and he's focusing directly on this. And it's quite clear that's oftentimes more effective at strength development than anything else because you can actually just like in the speed example, where you want to actually practice moving faster. So instead of practicing at 100% of your one art max for strength, you actually practice at higher than that to get better at it. So that's another much more advanced tool. Please don't let me get sued by saying all that, folks, be careful. Make sure you're doing the proper exercise in your position and caveat, caveat, caveat. Okay? But outside of that, it can be it's totally fine and safe.

Andrew Huberman: Yeah. With it, when people get injured, they can't train. You can't train, you don't progress, you lose progress. So certainly that's worth highlighting.
Andrew Huberman: Is the whole nervous system becoming fatigued and is the muscle group and the related musculoskeletal systems becoming fatigued?

Andy Galpin: We're going to go back to thinking about when you make these comments about it takes you three to five days and you've got better results in there. The assumption that you're probably running under is your training style is more reflecting that recovery time than it is your physiology. It's not you it's how you're training. So if you look at again all the Olympic weightlifters that are competing they're going to be squatting or some variation of squatting every day. That's going to happen. A lot of the times they're training multiple times a day and they will be doing some basically barbell full squat multiple times a day every day, six days a week, something like that. They're the best in the world at getting powerful. They're tremendously good at getting strong. You can do it right. It comes down to what does your volume look like what type of movements are you doing, what rep range, what overall volume are you hitting, and how are you doing it.

Andy Galpin: If you look at athletes, they train their legs every day. When they're running around, they're doing speed andy agility training every single day. They don't need three days to recover. Can you imagine a basketball player trying to ask for like three days to recover between practice?

Andrew Huberman: Right. Well, to be fair, as you chuckle at me, I'm doing other things on the intervening days. So I'll train a muscle group, like legs, and then I'll give it four days before I do an indirect.

Andy Galpin: What.

Andrew Huberman: I call an indirect exercise for legs, which for me would be sprinting. Then I get two days and then I'm training them again.

Andy Galpin: But nonetheless, an athlete has to do that every day, right? So the answer is you absolutely can train any of these muscles every single day. It really comes down to volume, Andy. It comes down to movement type and how are you getting it? So in the case of weightlifters and athletes, what we tend to see happen is there's two things. There is a long period of conditioning, and I don't mean endurance. What I mean is tissue tolerance and conditioning. So they're not going to start off their career at that pace, right? Their career might start off at five days a week, but maybe every other of those days is a PVC pipe only. And you're just training the movement patterns. You're working on technique, et cetera. And then eventually, maybe after six months or a year, those PVC pipe days turn into barbell only days. So now you went from a pound to 45. And then eventually, as your years go on, that ratchets up. So it depends on the style in general.
Andrew Huberman: Andy ideally with a spotter, especially bench pressing. Don't bench press alone in your basement kind of thing. A few people die each year from bench pressing alone in their basement or use dumbbells if you're going to do that. Harder to die using dumbbells. I suppose you could drop them on your head or something but not get stuck under them. Exercise selection and frequency of exercise implementation across the week. So I can imagine with this three x five creatine done three to five times per week you could imagine changing up the exercises every workout. Although considering that most of these three by five routines are going to be done with compound movements generally sooner or later one runs out of movements if the goal is to hit all the major muscle groups. However, let me give an example. Andy ask if it's okay to, for instance, do the three by five routine where one of the exercises for back is say a bent over row. You do that Monday, Wednesday and Friday. Okay.

Andrew Huberman: I can imagine one could do that and still recover andy improve over time but five days a week bent over rows five days a week. Is that okay? Can one still progress? Andy there I could imagine it's a strength answer of depends because some people recover more slowly than others. I'm very comfortable doing hitting muscle groups once directly per week and once indirectly. That's worked for me far better than two or three times per week. I get looks of sympathy when I say this but it's just how my physiology works kind of yeah, well and maybe I'm not optimizing a number of different features but the point being that some people really do seem to be able to train a muscle every day and still make progress. Other people seem to have trouble when they train a muscle every day. So how does one establish exercise selection when the goal is to make progress? And this brings up something very important and we're going to have a whole episode about this but local versus systemic recovery.
Andrew Huberman: Note captions training to failure. When the goal is strength, should one do it, should one avoid it or does it depend?

Andy Galpin: Well, yeah, it always depends. The way that I'll generally say it is, because of what we just outlined in the brilliant chart, you don't have to go to failure to see strength gains, especially early or even moderate, and I'm talking maybe five plus years. In your lifting career, would you call.

Andrew Huberman: Beginner zero to five years of training, intermediate? Five to 20 years of training?

Andy Galpin: Yeah, something like that.

Andrew Huberman: And then advanced would be people that really put the time and energy into fine tuning their program.

Andy Galpin: The vast majority of people who think they're advanced are really what we would.

Andrew Huberman: Call intermediate in all domains of life.

Andy Galpin: Fair. Even as a scientist, it's quite rare to reach that number of advanced. So I actually don't have any problem going to failure quite often. I'm also fine with people who don't want to go all the way there. You can get most of what you need getting what we call technical failure. So this is like, okay, that was really challenging. Boy, you started to have some breakdowns of technique. We're going to call that good. The only exception here, I want to point out, is people who are either novice or beginners, they really have no concept of what 100% means. And so I think it's actually very fruitful to take them to 100% just to give them a guideline of where it's at. Now, of course, do this on exercises that they are comfortable with or close. And maybe this is on a machine, maybe this is single joint movements or whatever it takes for them to have confidence. But actually, I don't think you should be scared of these. They're not really that much more dangerous than anything else there's.

Andy Galpin: I mean, think about it. If you're going to do a front squat or any exercise and your one rep max is 200, is it really that much more dangerous to do one try at 205 than it is to do five tries at 190? Is it really that much more? No, it's not. So you can do like we talked about in the first episode, you can do a repetition Max estimate where you get to like, 85% to 95% of where you think you are andy. Then instead of adding load, you just do as many reps as you can, google that number, and that'll tell you the conversion andy estimate of what your unread max is. That's fine. But also, I have absolutely no issue. In fact, I generally encourage it to take people up to that level. Certainly not day one or anywhere close to that, but at some point, let's see what you actually got. I'm just going to cut it off early. What I'm going to consider to be one of max anything more than a minor technical breakdown for that crew, we're going to stop Andy call. That good.
Andy Galpin: Of course. I got it. So we know specificity is technically optimal, but it's not realistic, not for that kind of extreme situation. So how do we balance these things? Well, it turns out this Prilepin's chart gives you guidelines for how much time, and by time I mean how many repetitions to stand in each of these rep ranges so that you get kind of the best of this world. You're going to find the same thing. By the way, when we get into endurance training, there's only so much training you can do at 95% of your heart rate before it starts becoming quite detrimental. You need to actually spend a lot of time at those lower intensities. So the Pillapin chart walks you through how many sets and it gives you a range. I think that the bottom of it is like, how much time do you spend at 60% to 70% of your one rep max? And it says like a minimum of this set to maximum of this set. But the ideal number of reps per set per week is like 18, and then it walks you through. And so there's four criteria on it.

Andy Galpin: I think it's 55% to 65%. Again, how many reps there? It's like three to six reps per set, 18 to 30 reps total. And I think the ideal rep range is like 24, something like that. So it takes you 55 to 65, 70 to 80, 80 to 90, and then 90 plus percent. What you'll see is the 90 plus percent number is more like one to two reps per set for a total of about seven total repetitions. If you start cruising past that, other bad things start to creep up in there. So that's a really effective chart. What it really highlights, though, is even somebody who's trying to maximize strength, you're going to spend something like 35 or so percent of your training time between this, like 55% to 65% range. So you're asking earlier, like, well, do I even count that one? The, the answer is yeah, you know, in that range, if it's below 55, 60%, you probably don't count it. Now, again, some coaches don't count unless it's even above 70. Fine.

Andy Galpin: It's not a major distinction, but you're going to spend the bulk of your time accumulating some technique, basically, and skill. Andy tissue tolerance, very important. The next step up is like two 8%, I think is sort of the cut off of how much time you spend between 70 and 80% of your one art max, and then it jumps down to like 23% and then all the way to 70%. So you can walk yourself through that and that gives you an extremely good guideline. And you'll notice all of these are still in the three to five range. It's just really you're manipulating it by total sets or total exercises so that can give you some structure to play with.

Andrew Huberman: We will provide a link to the Prilepin's chart in the show.
Andy Galpin: How do I maximize or how do I reduce my chance of injury while getting enough specificity? And so we have a classic paradigm over here. One, actually training protocol you can look up is called the Bulgarian Method. And the Bulgarians were amazing at the sport of Olympic weightlifting. Probably, in fact, the patriarch of this entire thing recently passed away. Ibajev niam sulamanagu pocket Hercules. One of the greatest weightlifters of all time came out of the system, and they do a lot of things. But one example in the Bulgarian system is you're going to do a one repetition maximum snatch. You're going to take a little bit of a break. You'll do a one repetition maximum clean and jerk. Take a little bit of a break, do a one repetition maximum front squat, take a little bit of a break, and you're going to repeat that two to three times a day, every day. That's specificity, right? Those people get extraordinarily strong now. They don't do that all year round. They don't do that with all their lifters. But this is when we're trying to peak for a major competition like the Olympics.

Andy Galpin: We are going so far into specificity, and that was very counter to the Russian system at the time, which is much more of our classic periodization sort of approach. Okay, specificity is tremendous, but in doing that, the Bulgarians just brutalize a lot of athletes, right. Because it's very difficult to handle something like that. And you can't really do that that long without getting wrecked.

Andrew Huberman: The goal is to win medals.

Andy Galpin: The goal is it's a totally different thing than longevity out of here, right? Like, we're trying to push the boundaries.

Andrew Huberman: Of or aesthetic changes unless someone has a naturally balanced physique. In general, if people do one sort of movement, I find that they tend to resemble the equipment that they did that movement with over time.

Andy Galpin: Right?

Andrew Huberman: That was a joke against kettlebells.
Andy Galpin: If you're trying to go for strength and you're below 70%, you're not really going to be improving strength because the total mass is not heavy enough. And so really, when we say strength, we're assuming you're at least generally 70% or higher. Now, if you're new to training, totally different thing, right? But if you're moderately trained to highly trained, you're going to be well north of 70%. So anything below that, we don't really count anyways. Those are warm upsets, basically. All right, so one thing to actually give you some very specific numbers here, and I don't have all of these memorized. We can perhaps provide a chart later or send out something to them. But there's a chart that you can look up called a Prilepin's chart. How do you spell that? P-R-I-L-I-P-I-N prillipin. And there's actually been a few studies on it. It's been around for a very long time. It's sort of in the coaching realm. And then a handful of studies out of New Zealand came out verifying and validating a lot of it. But what it effectively does is if strength is the goal, and this comes from the power lifting, weightlifting, sort of communities or optimizing for strength, then how much time do I need to spend at each intensity range? So 70%, 80%, 90%, et cetera.

Andy Galpin: Because specificity is going to say this. If you want to get better neuromuscular guy at shooting a basketball, the most important thing you could ever do is shoot a basketball under the exact circumstances that you're going to do it, right. Specificity always wins. If you want to get better at strength, the most important thing you need to do is that exact movement at that load. Andy, in this case, if you wanted to get better at benchpress, lifting at 100% of your max on a benchpress is the most specific thing you could ever do. The more you can do that, the faster you will increase your benchpress max. However, that's very hard to do without getting hurt. It's also not addressing what I call your defender. So if the reason you can't bench press higher than whatever you're benching now, it may not be your pure strength. It may be any number of things, like you don't have enough muscle or technique or okay, great. So specificity over here, variation on the other side. So we're playing this game we've talked about of how do I make sure that I can have enough specificity in my training without leading to overuse injury?
Andrew Huberman: Of the reasons I'm so happy to have you here having this discussion is we can really get into the weeds, but also hit a number of questions that I hear a lot. How does one contend with the first attempt at a lift not working out? Is it too heavy? Something goes wrong. Hopefully not injury promoting wrong, but something goes wrong. Do you count that? Do you reset the workout? And then the counterpart to that question is what do you do if it's too easy? It went wrong because you didn't put enough weight on the bar. Do you pick up a heavy enough set of dumbbells? Do you abandon the set? Andy? Replace it with another? I guess this is really a question of how much margin for error is there in volume when doing this three x five program.

Andy Galpin: Sure. Two things that I like to start with. Number one is I talked about linear periodization and undulating periodization. There's actually a new model, newish model called Autoregulation, which basically says you're going to go in today, Andy. Depending on any number of biomarkers performance markers or your performance, you will adjust your training based on how you're feeling that day, Andy. So 70% is not maybe, for example, not necessarily 70% of your one arm repetition, max, highest ever. It's 70% of what you can actually do that day. And so it actually allows you to auto regulate your training based on actually what's happening. And so you don't have to have as much long term planning in your program design because it'll sort of figure itself out as you're going. You can use velocity to determine this. Autoregulation you can use actually it's like taking it up to close to a max for the day and then basing all your percentages on that daily max or a lot of different ways. So that is actually one very effective strategy. Andy, there's a lot of research coming out on autoregulation.

Andy Galpin: There's a lot of different ways to do it. So that's one thing to say. Another thing to say is this three to five. Okay. It depends on if we're going for speed, power, or strength. Because while all those other variables are the same for three to five, the core difference between whether that is a power workout or a strength workout is the load, right? So if you are at a moderate load, say 30% of your one repetition max, up to about 70%, that's going to be a power based adaptation. Assuming you're going with high intent sorry.

Andrew Huberman: I have to interrupt. Maybe just clarify what intent is.

Andy Galpin: Yeah, you're attempting to move the implement or go through the movement pattern as fast as you can.

Andrew Huberman: Great, thank you.
Andrew Huberman: And one thing that you mentioned there is especially interesting to me, which is you said when you go from six sets of ten repetitions to ten sets of ten repetitions, it's not as beneficial and might even be counterproductive, but to me the difference between six and ten sets is only four sets. It doesn't even sound that much. So that sort of hints at the possibility that the thresholds for going from a workout that increases testosterone to a workout that diminishes testosterone is actually a pretty narrow margin.

Duncan French: Yeah, and I think it comes back to that intensity factor then what we saw that ten by ten protocol really sees pretty significant drop offs in the load. And again, we're trying to stimulate with intensity, with mechanical strain through intensity, as well as metabolic strain through volume. And I think that's the paradigm that you've got to look at is that the mechanical load has to come from the actual weight on the bar and the volume is the metabolic stimulus. How much are we driving lactate? How much are we driving glycogenolysis in terms of that type of energy system for executing a ten x ten protocol? And what we often saw was just a significant reduction in the intensity capabilities of an athlete to sustain that. So we shortened the volume to try and maintain the intensity.

Andrew Huberman: Interesting. And you could imagine just taking very long rest, keeping the session, being a big lazy bear. In training, I sometimes do this. I tell myself I'm going to work out for 45 minutes and then 2 hours later I'm done. But not because I was huffing and puffing the whole time, but because I was training really slowly. Is there any evidence that training slowly can offset some of the negative effects of doing a lot of volume?

Duncan French: Well, it's the old adage of two responses to your question. I mean, the first one, I would say there's a difference between ten sets of six and six sets of ten. And I think that comes back to the volume conversation. Six sets of ten is driving up metabolic stimulus. If you're doing ten sets of six, you can probably take it to a higher intensity, but you're not going to get the same metabolic load, you're not going to get the same internal metabolic environment that drives the lactate release that they will then signal further anabolic testosterone release because of the lactate in your body. That's a key consideration. The rest is often the consideration that's overlooked out there in general population and in many sporting environments. The rest is as important a programming variable as the load and the intensity. The load, the volume, et cetera. And yes, if you extend the volume, if you extend the duration of your rest periods, what you're ultimately doing is influencing that metabolic stimulus. Again, you're allowing the flushing of the body, the removal of waste products, lactate to be removed from the body, and then the metabolic environment is reduced.
Andy Galpin: Other ways, say a higher load, maybe as heavy as you can for, say, eight repetitions, is going to get through what's called mechanical tension. And so there's these different paths that we can get to the same spot. Now, eventually, these things have a saturation point, so you don't need all three of these mechanisms. The third one, of course, being muscle damage or breakdown. I know we want to chat a little bit about that, but none of these three are absolutely required. You can have multiple of them in a session. You don't have to have breakdown at all. That is a complete. Well, really, it's a flat out lie that you have to break a muscle down to cause it to grow. That's just not needed at all. You have to have one of these three things, though. And so, again, this allows you a lot of flexibility, which is why crafting your program, which is best for you, is actually fairly simple when it comes to hypertrophy.

Andy Galpin: You just have to make sure you do the work, and you want to make sure you have a few standards in place with the exercise choice and some other things that we'll hit in just a second. But that's really the fundamental way of getting to it, making sure either that signal is loud enough or frequent enough to give the nuclei a convincing enough reason to spend the resources. Because you have to remember two things. In order to grow new skeletal muscle, you need amino acids, which are your supply, and then you need primarily carbohydrates as the energy source to power that synthesis process. You remember basic chemistry that says if you're going to take two atoms and you're going to pull them apart or put them together, that's going to take energy. Typically in most of, actually, metabolism, when you split a bond, you're going to get it's called extragonic. You're going to get energy from that. But when you put them together, that's going to take energy.

Andy Galpin: This is why we call that protein synthesis, right? So you have to convince your nucleus that, one, invest those resources in energy, primarily carbohydrate, but number two, and more importantly, invest that supply. There is a ton of possible ways to get energy, but there's a very low amount of amino acids available, and you need them for many more things than just taking your biceps from 17 inches to 18 inches, right? It's not going to do that if you're in a position where, again, you can't sustain immune function, if red blood cell turnover needs to be higher, or any of the other main, like, tons of things that you need proteins for. So you have to be able to say, like, are you sure you really want to spend these resources and build it into muscle? Because once we do that, it's very difficult to go backwards, break them back down, and bring the amino acids back into that availability pool. So we can use them for either another function entirely or even another muscle group.

Andy Galpin: That's called protein redistribution, by the way. When you say maybe you don't do a lot of upper body work in your training and you're not eating enough protein or a minimal amount, and you're doing a lot of lifting in your legs, you notice your legs will get larger. But that's actually a lot of times you're pulling the protein from, say, your upper body in this case, and redistributing it back down to the quads. So that's what you have to get to. And in terms of application, what numbers to hit. We can go through each one of our modifiable variables just like we did with speed, andy, Strength and Power and walk through some of our best practices in each category.
Andy Galpin: Yeah, great. So ten was just sort of that like absolute minimum number to maintain, which is actually pretty cool if you think about it this way. If you went in and you did three sets of ten sets of ten repetitions correct. You're already at three. You did that three days a week. You're at your nine. That's almost ten. If you also just went to the gym one day a week, you did three sets of ten and you did three exercises, you're at nine working sets. You're basically done so achieving ten sets per week per muscle group. And now we're not even talking about indirect activation of a secondary. So you're going to hit ten. Fairly easy extension of that. Hitting 20 is actually still not that hard because of what's actually going to happen there. So in your example, if you're doing your chin ups well, would the biceps count? There's no exact rule there because there could be technique issues, it could be hand position. So you mentioned chin up very specifically.

Andy Galpin: A chin up is actually going to put your hands in this position where your palms are facing up, right? This is supination and pronation, so you're going to be there. Well, that's actually quite different than a pull up where your hands are in the opposite direction. So a chin up actually is going to be pretty good activator in your biceps for most people. So you would expect actually to probably count that because it's going to be very difficult to not see some fatigue in your biceps, depending on your mechanics, depending and by that I mean just the segment lengths of your bones. That's where your muscles originate, insert. There's nothing you can do about it's, not even a technique or a focus issue. It's just simple fact. The matter of that's, how you pull best in that area, the position of what your hands are on the barber, wider grip, more narrow grip, it's going to change muscle use. So we talked about earlier, I think in the previous episode, that exercises do not determine adaptations, applications do, but exercises do determine things like the movement plane, the joint you use, and typically the eccentric concentric sort of ratio, as well as oftentimes the muscle groups involved. So there's just not a lot of things you can do depending on how you are built of some exercises activating a secondary group and you don't want it. So it's not always a technique issue.
Andrew Huberman: I got what you say, good, healthy parenting advice from Dr. Andy Galpin. So if it's ten sets per week for biceps in order to maintain or further grow the biceps. But does that mean if somebody does ten sets of chin ups or ten sets of chin ups in rows that they are checking off any of the boxes for biceps? Assuming that they're doing the movement properly and targeting the major muscle group that a given movement is supposed to target, which in my mind, when you're doing chin up, you're supposed to mainly be using your back muscles. And then there are secondary muscles or secondary activation of other muscles. But of course, some people, their arms grow like crazy when they do chin ups and their back doesn't grow at all. So this is where we're back to the kind of genetic preloading of the system, if you will. So how does one meet this ten sets per week minimum when dividing different body parts and thinking about this direct and indirect activation?

Andy Galpin: So, two things, there's no specific exact rule here. And this is why these set ranges are ranges, right? And this is why we don't say like ten is. So ten would be sort of the minimum number you want to get to. The more realistic number that most people, especially if you're advanced or even intermediate, is more like 15 to 20 working sets per week. Now, if you're very well trained, you probably want to even push more towards like 25. And in fact, past that, there's just not a lot of research. So the optimal number may be 30. We don't really know. It's just hard to get that much work in. It may actually even be detrimental.

Andrew Huberman: And here we're referring to natural athletes. That is, people who, for whatever reason, either because they're not taking andy prescription drugs, or maybe if they are, whose levels of steroid hormones, mainly the androgens like testosterone, et cetera, do not exceed the normal reference range values, either because that's what they are naturally or that's what they're replacing through pharmacology. Whereas when we think of technically, someone could be taking exogenous hormones to replace a deficiency and then they're still in normal range. Okay, but I just want to clarify, because you work with athletes, a number of different sports where drugs are andy are not tolerated, et cetera, andy the general population. That what we are talking about here is for the general population, not for steroid using athletes.

Andy Galpin: Correct.

Andrew Huberman: Okay.
Andrew Huberman: What about exercise order?

Andy Galpin: Amazing. So implicit in this exercise choice thing, what you're going to notice is these modifiable variables interact with each other, right? Andy, you can clearly see how when we talked about volume, andy, to clarify, volume is the repetitions multiplied by the sets. That's typically how we express volume. Well, that's going to be directly influenced by intensity. The heavier load you put on the barbell, the less repetitions you can do. And the inverse, right, rest intervals. The shorter you keep your rest intervals, then either the lower the weight has to go, the intensity, or the lower the rep range has to go. Order is the same thing, choice is the same thing. So all of these things modify each other. They play a little bit of a hand in what everything else does. So with the exercise choice thing, rolling into exercise order, you get to play a couple of games here.

Andy Galpin: When we talked about strength and power, I basically said stick to the big movements, most complicated and compound movements first. You don't have to do that with hypertrophy. You can do this in a couple of ways. You can do the thing you're just simply most interested in first. You can do this thing called pre fatigue. So say you're going to do a back day. You could go in and do nothing but isolated biceps as your very first exercise and then roll into your pulling movements. Because what you'll see is during most pulling activities, the biceps are a secondary or a tertiary muscle group. But you've pre fatigued them, you've guaranteed that muscle of most interest got its most training in, and everything else is secondary. So you can start, if you want with single joint movements, you can start with isolation stuff or you can start with compound stuff. Either way, it just really comes down to preference and what you're specifically trying to develop.

Andy Galpin: Now this also goes back to the exercise choice question, right, because it's sort of the same thing, right? Like which 01:00 a.m. I choosing and where I wanted it, the captain was the exercise splits. We just sort of talked about am I doing body part splits. And I know a question I get a lot here is, well, which ones should I package together? I'm not really concerned with it. All you should worry about is how many times per week and in fact, total volume you achieve on a muscle group per week. And it doesn't really matter how those things are folded in, it's really a personal preference issue. One mistake that we see here commonly is grossly underappreciating that the legs are not a muscle group, right? So the legs have a whole bunch of muscle groups in them. So we see a classic split like I'll do shoulders and chest Monday, and then I'll do biceps and forearms Tuesday, and then legs Wednesday or whatever, and then back to upper body, and I was like, you're like, wait a minute, you have four days dedicated to the upper body and one for, quote unquote legs.
Andrew Huberman: People give people permission to completely avoid training a given body part if their goal is balanced. Development. And yet I think most people who are resistance training are seeking balanced development. I don't know anybody that actively wants to have big upper body, small legs. I think that comes from neglect and laziness in most cases. Sometimes it's injury related or other things. But I think this is an important point to raise that. Any good program for hypertrophy, I would think, would have to take into account people's genetic and natural variation, sport based variation in which muscle groups just tend to grow easily for them and which ones require a lot more focus and work.

Andy Galpin: Yeah, absolutely. First of all, you have permission to do or not do anything you'd like to do. In terms of hypertrophy training, I generally would not recommend disregarding a muscle group entirely. I know that's not what you actually suggested, but just to make sure that people didn't hear it that way. What I would do is in this example is I would continue to do those big movements. I would just keep the volume low so I might do two sets or something twice a week. There's a whole bunch of reasons you want to make sure that those motor patterns are there. You want to make sure that especially the benefit of these compound movements is you get to work so many complementary muscle movements at the same time. So in the case of, like, a loaded squat, you're not only working stability in the hip as well as the knee, but you're also working upper body. Your rhomboids are keeping in position. Your neck has to stay in position, your toes, everything is working. And so it's really difficult to get those things.

Andy Galpin: When you take that movement out. Andy you replace it with, say, a machine hamstring curl. That whole element of balance, neurological control is very, very important to maintain over time. And that just gets removed if you go to machines only. So I would keep some of those things in maybe even not all year round, but maybe one quarter of the year, two quarters every other rotate it something like that. As long as if the reason you weren't doing, say, those squats was because you're like, it hurts my back or something. Okay, great. Then leave it out. But if it's just simply you don't want your quads to go too much, I would just keep that volume low and do something just to kind of touch it. Andy keep it activated. Andy to maintain all those other things, like flexibility, range of motion. I would bet anything your Adductors are probably underdeveloped right now. You can get those by doing your squats because you're not really doing, I'm sure, much Adduction training. Andy so things like that, that just get lost when you're only thinking all big muscle groups that come inherent in doing the larger movements. And so you don't have to worry about them or train them separately.

Andrew Huberman: I appreciate that. And in reality, I do two to three really hard work sets of hack machine squats per week, which is plenty for me to maintain and even get a little bit stronger. But per our earlier discussion about a year ago, I shifted to doing very low repetition ranges to main strength in that movement.

Andy Galpin: There you go.

Andrew Huberman: But I am actively avoiding hypertrophy in that muscle group.

Andy Galpin: Yeah, or another solution would actually be do something like one set of failure a week, not even extremely long. Just do something in the eight to 15 repetition range at the end of all that strength set and just get a little bit of pump there. So just so that those muscles can touch that level of fatigue, touch that level of strain and mechanical tension, walk away.

Andrew Huberman: Great, thank you for that.
Andrew Huberman: One thing I wanted to ask about is prioritizing specific body parts and therefore specific exercises. And here, I'm not necessarily referring to trying to bring up a so called weak body part, an area that tends to be either genetically deficient, because in some cases I learned, for instance, having seen a lot of competitive track and field championships, I love watching track and field as a spectator up to Hayward Field in Oregon whenever there's a meet.

Andy Galpin: Oh, sure.

Andrew Huberman: Really love that. The sprinters are amazing. They have some of the highest calves in the world that I've ever seen. I mean, like little like little micro calves. But they're fast as hell.

Andy Galpin: They're right behind the knee and they have a very long distance between that calf and their foot, which makes it propulsion. Excellent.

Andrew Huberman: Right. They wouldn't stand a chance as a competitive bodybuilder. No, but because something different is being selected for in bodybuilding. But obviously they're magnificent for sprinting. Most people, of course, reside somewhere between the extreme of very long muscle bellies from origin to insertion or very, very short muscles. Usually people have one or two body parts that they want to emphasize for whatever reason. These days, it seems to be people are really what are they saying now? Like glutes are the new biceps or biceps are the new glutes? I don't know. Anyway, you see this stuff?

Andy Galpin: I love them both. By the way, I am so pro curls in the squat rack.

Andrew Huberman: There you go.

Andy Galpin: Love it, right?

Andrew Huberman: There you go.

Andy Galpin: Nobody killed me.

Andrew Huberman: So everyone has their thing that they would like to emphasize. But I have a question because we're specifically talking about hypertrophy, which is should people give themselves permission to not train a body part if their goal is balanced hypertrophy? I'll give a couple of examples. One of the reasons why I've, for instance, not done a lot of free weight squatting is because despite my quadriceps being rather weak, according to you, they tend to grow rather easily relative to other muscle groups. And the goal for me has always been balanced development. And so I emphasize hamstring work and I emphasize calf work and hamstring work. It's not that I don't train my quads at all, but I do far less for them and I avoid the big compound movements for them. I occasionally do them. And again, this is not about what I do or don't do. But I think that in the context of a conversation about hypertrophy, is it appropriate to give people permission to say, listen, if you're just genetically strong large lats doing a lot of chin ups and rows might actually be the worst thing for you if your goal is balanced development. And I ask because I don't often hear anyone any credentialed.
Andy Galpin: That's going to drive a lot of the adaptation. You can get to these single joint movements like a little bit later. But having said that, because of the way that people move differently, their anthropometrics and their biomechanics and even their technique, the same exact exercise will not necessarily work the same exact muscle groups for multiple people. So if you and I both went and did a back squat, if you did a little bit more of what we call a high bar squat, so this is the bar is literally sitting up higher up on your neck. You're keeping your back more vertical. And because in order to do that, you shift your knees much further past your toes, keeping, of course, your whole foot on the ground in good position. Okay, that's going to generally put more of an emphasis on the knee joint, right, Andy? So that's not a bad thing. You tend to see a little bit more work in the quads.

Andy Galpin: There a little bit less work in the spinal erectors and back because you're actually not supporting the weight horizontally, which is a much more difficult position. It's vertically stacked. Okay, if I were to do it in the classic low bar squat, which is, again, lowering the bar down further down my back towards more like my shoulder blades, I probably take a little bit of a wider stance. And when I squat, I drive my glutes back further away from the midline, as in fact, as a general rule, if you take the midline of your body, the thing that moves the farthest away from that midline is likely to be the thing that's activating the most. So in the case of the front squat, you're not generally going to be using your glutes as much if you're in that, or not even front squat, just that high bar squat where you're very, very vertical. Your knees are going to be moving very far over your toes, which is fantastic. Therefore, it's a little bit more knee dominant, as can we say.

Andy Galpin: It the other version here. You can keep your shins really close to vertical. You move your butt backwards. You're going to have to then lean forward with your torso, which means that it'll be more low back, more glutes, and a little bit less knee. Now, that's a general statement. It's not necessarily always true, but as a guideline there, that is one exact exercise where you may be going, man, I'm trying to improve this clear weakness I have in my quads. I can't even leg extension my body weight. I have a significant problem there. So maybe in your particular case, if I'm hammering you or you're hammering yourself in a squat exercise and you're wondering why your quads aren't getting any stronger or growing in any size, it may be because of the style of the movement. So I may need to go. Andrew all right, look, squats in general, if you look at the research, are an excellent exercise for quad development. But for you, they're not because of the way you stand or just because of neural activation.

Andy Galpin: It doesn't matter. So I need to take you to a machine and isolate that muscle group so we can make sure we see development in that. So if you're trying to grow a specific body part area, individual muscle, it's very important that you're actually seeing progress there. And don't worry about well, in the textbook, the benchpress is supposed to be good for your PEC. Because if you're not actually moving the right position or it depends on the angle in which your sternum actually sits in your body, a benchpress may actually be doing very little for your PEC. And you may need to adjust to, say, an incline bench or a decline bench or a PEC fly. So machines can be fantastic at letting you isolate without having to worry about things like stability, your low back position, getting hurt where's your neck at. You can really concentrate on just the movement, concentrate on the muscle, and let everything else kind of go away and ensure you're getting training in that specific area.

Andrew Huberman: Those are excellent recommendations.
Andy Galpin: All those strategies are effective personal preference. As long as the total amount of volume on the working muscle is equated throughout the week, which we'll get to those numbers in a second, then you're going to be in the exact same spot, no problem. I would actually generally encourage people to choose exercise science, a variety of fashions. I actually think that it's important that you do some number of combination of what we call bilateral and unilateral exercises. So bilateral being think about it like a squat where bi, meaning two lateral, you have 2ft on the ground moving in sequence. Here, unilateral is one. So this could be something as simple as a rear foot elevated split squat. It could be a single leg leg press or single leg curl. It could be a pistol squat, something where the individual limb is moving one at a time. You need to have a combination of bilateral and unilateral training that's good to do for strength as well.

Andy Galpin: Probably not super important for power, but also very important for making sure for hypertrophy's sake, you're not getting any imbalances as you progress, especially through months and years of training. So make sure you're doing a little bit of a combination. Whether you want to pick specific implements. That's really a methods question, Andy, a preference question than it is concepts. So dumbbell, great kettlebell, fine barbell, awesome band, doesn't matter. Body weight, none of these things are as important because all you're trying to do is create a certain insult in the tissue and the implement is just whichever one you feel best doing it. And this is where actually machines come into play a lot. Machines are greatly underappreciated. They are a fantastic resource, especially somebody who's either early in their fitness journey or somebody who really is having a hard time targeting a muscle group with a bigger compound movement. So when you're choosing exercises for hypertrophy, you're going to want to start with those bigger compound movements.
Andrew Huberman: Yes. So I'd love to talk about those modifiable variables as they relate to choice of movements, order of movements, volume, so sets and repetitions and frequency of training. And I'm particularly interested in frequency of training because that relates to the so called split where typically one is not training their whole body every workout, although there are, I'm sure, hypertrophy workouts that are whole body workouts but where people are dividing their body parts onto different days. So would love to go through this list one by one, starting with exercise choice.

Andy Galpin: Cool. Great. So in the previous section, we pretty much said exclusively choose your exercises by the movement patterns and you want to balance between pushing and pulling and rotation and things like that. In this particular case, you have the option to do either. Here's my recommendation. Most people default almost exclusively to choosing by body parts here, right? I'm going to do calves and shoulders today and chest and back, whatever combinations of things they want. That is clearly effective strategy. However, many studies have actually been done where you choose by movement patterns and that is actually equally effective. Now, one little caveat I actually should have said a few minutes ago when we talk about the research on muscle hypertrophy, it is important to distinguish the fact that the vast majority of this research is coming from a novice to moderately trained individuals.

Andy Galpin: There's actually more and more research coming out on trained individuals, but that's still moderately trained, right? Even those ones. So what happens in those people that are actually way past that point? We don't know scientifically. It's very difficult to do research there. So that's an important caveat I will acknowledge when I say, hey, you don't need to do this or you have to do this. You're assuming a training status of moderate to low may or may not be true. Past that, we don't know scientifically. I have certain thoughts personally, but the science will only take us that far. So that being said, you can actually choose by muscle or by movement pattern here, whichever is your personal preference. And this is actually where you can just become a good coach, whether you're coaching somebody else through this fitness journey or it's yourself, and give them a little bit of autonomy. So maybe you select the first three exercise science, then let them select one every day. And so if they especially want to make sure that one muscle group grows, let them target that muscle andy maybe the rest of the day you've actually split it up as push, pull or something else like that.
Andrew Huberman: Thank you for joining me for today's discussion. All about tools to improve your fitness. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and Apple and on both Spotify and Apple. You can leave us up to a five star review. If you have questions for me, or comments about the podcast or guests that you'd like me to include on the Hubruminlab Podcast, please put those in the comments section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. During today's episode, and on many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we discuss supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like enhancing sleep, hormone support, and focus.

Andrew Huberman: The huberman lab podcast is partnered with Momentous Supplements. If you'd like to see the supplements discussed on Huberman Lab podcast, please go to momentous spelled O-U-S. So momentous.com huberman if you're not already following me on social media, it Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, Facebook, Twitter and LinkedIn. And on all of those platforms, I cover science and science based tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the Huberman Lab Podcast, but much of which is distinct from the content on the Huberman Lab podcast. So again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media platforms. If you haven't already, subscribed to the Huberman Lab podcast. Neural network newsletter. This is a completely zero cost. Newsletter comes out about once a month, and it includes podcast, summaries, and toolkits. Toolkits are short PDFs that, for instance, describe a toolkit for sleep, a toolkit for learning and neuroplasticity, toolkit for fitness, and on and on.

Andrew Huberman: To sign up for the Neural Network newsletter, you simply go to Hubermanlab.com, go to the menu, scroll down to newsletter, and provide your email. We do not share your email with anybody. And again, the Neural Network newsletter is completely zero cost. Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion. All about tools to improve your fitness. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science.
Andy Galpin: The nutrients aside. Perhaps we can come in a few more minutes andy talk about that. So all we really have to do is going back to our dogma of activation of something on the cell wall we've talked about this earlier. That's got to induce that signaling cascade. That's got to bone strength enough to cause the nucleus to react to it, to go to the ribosomes to initiate this entire cascade of protein synthesis. Okay? So that signal has to be one of a couple of things. Either it has to be strong enough one time, it has to be frequent enough, or it has to be a combination of these things. All right, so I can get there with a lot of frequency. Andy a moderate signal. I can get there with very low frequency and a large signal, like more akin to what you did with Mike back in the day, I'm sure, and.

Andrew Huberman: Still train that way, still train each muscle group mainly once a week directly and once a week indirectly.

Andy Galpin: So all you have to do there to not fail is to make sure the training is hard enough. Andy it's going to work. If you choose the frequency path, then you actually have to make sure you're not training too hard to where you can actually maintain the frequency. The only wrong combination here is infrequent and low intensity. Andy low volume, that's it. As long as one of those three variables is high, you're going to get there, because the mechanisms that are needed to activate that signaling cascade are wide ranging. And this is why, when we even see things like blood flow restriction training, right? This is when you put, like, a cuff on your arm or your leg and you block blood flow and you use no load or as low as, say, 30% of your maximum, and you take it to fatigue failure. That actually is an equally effective way of inducing hypertrophy, despite the fact that you're using 3510, maybe most 20% to 30% of your one at max. Why? Because you went through the route of metabolic disturbance. Okay?
Andrew Huberman: Okay, let's talk about hypertrophy, a topic that occupies the minds of so many youth, young men, but also a lot of women. I think one of the really interesting progressions that's taken place in the last decade or so is that far more men and women are using resistance training in order to evoke hypertrophy growth of muscles for aesthetic reasons and for all sorts of reasons. What are the ways that people can induce hypertrophy?

Andy Galpin: So not to correct you or insult you, but probably a better way to think about that question is really what stimuli do I need to give the muscle to induce hypertrophy? Now there are hormonal factors that are important. There are nutritional factors. But just to stick with the context of training, this is really going to frame a lot of our answers. And as you'll see, it's one of the reasons why I call hypertrophy training kind of idiot proof in terms of programming. Now, the work is hard, difficult and all that, but the precision needed is a lot less than what we saw in Power Andy strength. Andy. So if you note there it's very important that you do it in this style with this intent and within these parameters. And if you're outside these parameters, it's not going to be it. Hypertrophy has a very broad range in terms of your actual applications. And this is why you have and will continue to see countless styles of training that all work.

Andy Galpin: I mean, I know you were mentored earlier in life by one of my favorite people in this entire field, Mike Menser. Like, just an absolute character. His style was completely different than what you would see in a classic textbook or Andy number of different influencers or coaches or individuals. And if you've ever thought to yourself like, why is it all these programs work? And people love to jump to things like, well, that's the steroids, just get that out of the equation for now. Independent of that, that's not even part of the equation. You're still going to see results. And the question is, like, why? Well, that's because what's driving changes in strength and power are the adaptations of specificity. What's driving changes in hypertrophy is much more well rounded. And so you have options to get there. Remember, you're training a movement and now you're training a response and a muscle that caused the growth that's very, very different. So if we look at the classic dogma, we have to basically challenge the muscle to need to come back, in this case, specifically bigger, and the nutrients need to be there to support that growth.
Andy Galpin: Yes. Love it. One last little thing I don't think we did justice is intention. And the reason I want to go back to this now is because we've talked a lot about specific loads you have to hit and that's generally the case. But if intention is there, you can fudge those numbers in terms of how much load goes on the bar. In fact, you can get as low as no load on the bar. A great example here is like a plank exercise. So you can do a plank in which you get in a position and you simply contract the least amount necessary to hold the position. Also, you could contract as hard as possible, pulling your scapula down and back, squeezing your core, squeezing your quads, squeezing your glutes. That is actually going to still help strength production because you're attempting to contract very, very hard, even though, quote unquote, the load is the same. That thing extends to weight on the bar. So you could theoretically see large improvements in strength at 50% of your one at max if you're contracting as hard as possible. And so there's lots and lots of different ways you can train for strength that are outside of this weight lifting, weight training spectrum. Andy, if you hear things like this and you're like, wow, I know, I read this book, or I saw this other coach who I got so much stronger that way.

Andy Galpin: Well, if intention is there, those are absolutely possible. This could be anything from body weight, style of training. It could be very low load implement stuff. So a kettlebell, a light kettlebell or a ball, it could be single leg training. It's like all kinds of different methods. They will only work for strength, though, when you're past your first handful of months of training, if intention is there, and if it is, then these specific numbers and protocols don't matter as much, so don't get too caught up in them if you're not worrying about exercise quality. And this is very, very important because you mentioned earlier about how you stop taking your phone into the gym with you. One of our former students, Ramsay Ninja, is the head strength conditioning coach at the University of Kansas, and he made a great post a couple of days ago where he gave sort of a tip of, how do I improve training quality? And one of his tips is, set your playlist before you go to the gym. And the reason is people spend so much time in between sets just finding the next song that they like.

Andy Galpin: It makes their workout so long. Andy so unproductive. So that is one strategy or do what you do, which is ditch the music entirely. When you don't have music or a phone to look at, you only have one job, you only have one thing to pay attention to. And what you'll find is the quality of the training will go up exponentially. You will feel kind of, quote unquote, bored. But that just means you'll go back to training and you'll get a lot more done, because you have one thing to focus on. So you can get a lot more done when you avoid those distractions and when you're doing strength, and especially power work, since it's not fatiguing, strength will be a little bit, but power won't be. People tend to get very bored. They're used to either feeling a pump or a burn or a sweat, and that's their perception of my quality of workout. These exercises will not hit that for you. So there has to be another metric you're looking at, which is, I'm going to try to move as well as I can, as hard as I can.

Andy Galpin: That's going to produce your results. If you can't do that, then you might as well just not do these workouts, go do something else. You're just going to be wasting time. You're going to be burning a very low amount of calories. You'll have wasted an hour and you're going to go right back to the place you were. So be very intentional. There are actually some studies showing that music can enhance performance. We've done some of these in our lab. So what's that mean? It's not about the music per se. It's about the focus and intent and do whatever it takes to be very focused and intent and you can actually get in and out very quickly and get a lot of work done and see a lot of results.

Andrew Huberman: Love it.
Andy Galpin: Yeah, it's great.

Andrew Huberman: With your permission, I'm going to read back my summary list of training for power and training for strength according to your description, and you can tell me where I'm right and where I'm wrong. I'm going to pick three to five exercise science. These should be compound exercises, so multi joint movements. I'm going to perform those exercises for three to five repetitions each. I'm going to do three to five movements total per workout, and I'm going to rest three to five minutes between sets. Okay. If I'm training for power, the weight loads on the work set, so not the warm up sets, but the work sets are going to fall somewhere in the range of 30% to 70% of my one repetition maximum. Yes.

Andy Galpin: And the larger the movement, the higher that number goes. So on a squat, you're okay getting 50 or 60%. On a bench, you would not want to go that high. You would want to stay close to that 30% to 40% range. So the way you scale that up and down is dependent upon the difficulty of the movement.

Andrew Huberman: Great. If training for strength, I'm going to have my work sets be 70% or more of my one repetition maximum.

Andy Galpin: Yes. And the only thing to add there is in the case of actually all of them, it's okay to go less than three reps per set. So a single or a double one or two reps time is also fantastic. So we use three to five as the concept, but less is okay. Going more than that is generally not a good idea. So less is okay, more is generally not okay.

Andrew Huberman: And then you listed off a number of really valuable, I don't even want to call them fine points, but important points to keep in mind within each and both of these programs. One that really stands out in my mind is this idea of if I perform this three by five program, but I'm also including some hypertrophy work for arms or calves or muscle groups that might not be hit as directly as one might like during the three by five component. That's okay, but do that after the three by five training. And keep in mind that that additional work can potentially compromise recovery for the three by five power promoting or strength promoting program. The example being, for instance, if one does arm work on the first workout of the week or even the third workout of the week or the fifth workout of the week, and that arm work is higher repetition, hypertrophy.

Andrew Huberman: Directed work, it's reasonable to assume that it might impede some of the three by five power promoting or strength promoting training in the subsequent workout. So just to be mindful of that and perhaps throttle back on the intensity or the volume, or if my goal is strictly power or strictly strength, probably best to leave out other forms of training.
Andy Galpin: It's all because we've done research in my lab using this stuff on the deadlift, so I can speak to it very directly. When you go to pull it off the ground, some people are going to fail right at the bottom, meaning they won't get the weight off the ground at all. Some people will fail just below the knees. That's likely kind of like the hardest transition period. And then some people will fail right at the top just before they can lock out. Okay, great. So what that means is at some point of that lift, you're going to only be limited by your strength in the weakest area, all right? So if you have a constant load on the bar in those other two parts of the range of motion where you are not the weakest, they're never truly being tested for their maximum strength because they're always being limited by the previous one. This is the same argument that we would get into if people ask about what you think about using straps, right? Strapping your hand to a bar for deadlift, things like that.

Andy Galpin: There's pros and cons here. There are times when you want to use a strap, and there are times when it's a bad idea. So what dynamic variable resistance is, is either using things like a heavy band or chains on the bar, if you've ever seen people do that. So in my lab, we actually have a force plate on the ground, and then we have built in. Basically hooks in the front and the back. So we can actually set a barbell on top of the force plate where you stand on it, and then run, Andy, from the back to the front, running over top of the weights. And so when you stand up, as you're going up vertically, the bands are getting tighter and tighter and pulling the weight towards the ground. So the weight is getting heavier and heavier as you stand up. So as you start to gain mechanical advantage in your positioning, you start to increase load because the bands are getting tighter and tighter and tighter. So this allows you to train that full part of the strength curve and to challenge your stronger areas with heavier weight. Andy your weaker areas with lower weight.

Andy Galpin: You can do the same thing with a bench press, you can do it with a squat and any other exercise variation and dynamic variable resistance is incredibly effective for a number of things. You're going to give up a little bit because the total load you can put on the barbell is lower because you're going to be adding, in large cases, several hundred pounds of band tension. Andy so pros and cons, it's always a game. It changes the curve. But it's a very good technique that people it's fairly easy to implement. It's fun. In fact, if you try this on a bench or a squat, you're going to be the first time you give it a go. You're like, oh, my God, because the bands are pulling you all over the place. So you have to get very stable very quick. Been shown a number of times, a handful of studies out of many laboratories to be a very effective training technique, a little bit more advanced. But I wanted to throw that in there for the folks that are maybe just tired of sort of doing the same barbells and dumbles and machines and you want to try something different.

Andy Galpin: A very effective technique.

Andrew Huberman: Sounds like fun.
Andrew Huberman: What are some good exercises for targeting the rear deltoids? Andy neck safely that people can perform for stabilization and for hypertrophy?

Andy Galpin: Yeah. I would recommend people check out Eric Cressy. He is a wonderful strength conditioning coach. He actually is, I think, the director of pitching for the New York Yankees. Now, is that spelled C-R-E-S-S-I-E-C-R-E-S-S-E-Y-I believe. And he's got a facility in, I believe, Boston, as well as in Florida. So he's very involved in pitching as well as hockey and things like that. So he has so many free videos. Andy resources on so much of the shoulder girdle, mostly because he he's dealt with overhead and throwing athletes. Andy so the precision required there is tremendous. So you want to be very careful when you start playing in this area because the wrong positioning of your scapula can cause a whole bunch of problems in your neck and low back. And so he would be a great resource to go take a look at that. Depending on how your scapulas are gliding and sliding andy the way that you want your rotator cuffs firing, your Rhomboids, it's very complicated very quickly. So you want to learn more.

Andy Galpin: Go there as a very quick couple of answers. One of my favorite exercise science, lying on a bench or putting some bench and then just doing a reverse fly. Basically, the reason I like stabilizing the rest of the body is so you can make sure you can focus on just using those rear dolphoids and putting your scapulas in the right position. Now, there's a specific set of queuing that you want the scapula to move down and back for. Again, check out Eric or any number of folks in that area to do it, but that's a very simple way the reverse flight to get there.

Andrew Huberman: Great. And then, in terms of neck, exercise science was told to avoid bridges because they can cause damage to the discs.

Andy Galpin: I will probably never do a bridge ever, the rest of my life. So isometrics are a great exercise for that because if you think about what you're asking muscle groups to do in the neck, you mostly want it to be able to do a certain type of rotation, a little bit of flexion extension and some other movements. But in general, it should be being stable. So you want to walk through these joints asking kind of what they do. Are they a moving joint, are they a stability joint? In this case, you want to be there, so isometrics are going to put you in a much better position. There are some actually pretty cool devices that you can wear, and you can put them on your head and you can do all kinds of movement and get some great training there. Those are great starts, but if you don't have any of that, just basic IsoMet metrics are a great way to go about it. Neck bridges would not be on that list for me.

Andrew Huberman: No neck bridges, folks.
Andy Galpin: It, this could be your training strategy. Yeah, absolutely. So you can really take it that serious. In fact, if you look at, again, the weightlifters, they will do cluster sets by default, not even trying. So say they'll do like a clean and then they'll drop the weight back out. They're supposed to be doing, say, a set of three, but almost always they're going to shake it out, regrip and then pull it again. And sometimes their set of three takes like a minute and then it's like, you hear it's funny because it's, like I said, a triple PR. No, you did three singles. What's the difference between doing three singles and a set of three when you took a minute between each rep. I love that community. It could be your strategy. It could be like, hey, for this five week block, this is all my training, especially for your compound movements. If you're going to go to start doing some of the smaller movements, maybe you give up on that.

Andy Galpin: It could also just be something you do for your one primary exercise for the day. So do that thing that is the most important first and just do it for that one and then the rest of them. You can kind of ditch it if you need to save a little bit of that time. It can also be something you do by feel. So you're two reps in and you go, guy like, I'm not feeling like Poppy here. Like re racket. Catch my breath for a quick second and do it so it doesn't have to be ultra planned. I guess what I'm doing is I'm giving you an excuse to make sure you're super fresh for every rep it matters. The last one I want to talk about here is what's called dynamic variable resistance. So dynamic variable resistance is fixing the problem we have with what's called the human strength curve. So, theory of constraints. Again, you are only as strong as you are in your weakest point of the movement. So depending on the movement you do, this happens at a different range of motion. Well, the deadlift is the easiest example.
Andy Galpin: So two more, little more advanced techniques that I want to throw out there, and one of them is called cluster sets. So cluster sets are there's a bunch of ways to do it, but imagine taking a mini break in between every single repetition. So say you're going to do five repetitions in a row. What you're actually going to do is do one repetition, set it down, pause for five to 10 seconds and then do the next one pause, do the next one, pause, pause, pause, pause, pause. So you can imagine doing like a squat and you're going to go down, explode up, you're going to stand there, you're going to rack it out. You're going to kind of like shake back out, catch your breath, walk back in, do another one, rack it out, and you're going to repeat that until you've executed your three or four or five repetitions. And then you take your three to five minute break before your next set.

Andy Galpin: That is an incredibly effective way for both strength, power, and actually even hypertrophy because you can keep the quality, the force output, the power output very, very, very high because you're getting these little mini breaks. Andy you're not getting fatigue setting in. By the time you hit your, say, third or fourth or fifth repetition in that set, after repetition one, you start to see very small, subtle reductions in power output because you start to see a little bit of fatigue. You take those five to 10 seconds off, even up to 20 seconds, you can actually do it. You don't see any drop in force output over the course of the five. And so what you really have done is you've gotten five in this example, first repetitions, which is the way that we will kind of say it, right? So all five of those had the same quality as rep number one, which is, again, as we're talking, that's the driver, Andy strength. And so that's the one we want to preserve. So it takes a little bit longer for some exercises.

Andy Galpin: It's not very good. Um, it's great for like a deadlift because you set it back down, shake it back out, regrip, hard to do with the bench. You got to re rack it back in. Andy rerack it back out. It's like kind of a pain in the ass. So there's some exercises it doesn't work well with and some that it does, but cluster sets and a lot of research on those, very effective.

Andrew Huberman: Would you recommend if somebody's doing cluster sets, that they do them for every session within that week or just this is an occasional thing, you could do.
Andrew Huberman: It was simply meant as a template from which people could evaluate their own existing fitness program, perhaps modify it somewhat or a lot, or if you were interested in trying that specific fitness program, that you could do that. And we have provided a link both to that episode in the show note captions, but we've also provided a link to a table or chart that describes that foundational fitness program. It provides examples of different cardiovascular training and resistance type training sessions, and it describes some potential exercises and the rationale for those exercises and the rationale for selecting particular repetition ranges and rest between sets. All that information is available completely zero cost. You don't even need to sign up for anything, you simply go to the link that we provided in the show note captions, and there's a downloadable PDF there for you to explore.

Andrew Huberman: Now, in addition to the solo episode that I did about optimal fitness protocols, we did a six episode guest series with Dr. Andy Galpin, who is a professor of physiology at Cal State Fullerton and a world expert in all aspects of exercise and muscle physiology. That episode described a lot of the science, and in particular, science backed tools for improving everything from long distance endurance to anaerobic capacity, strength, hypertrophy speed, power recovery, nutrition supplementationbased tools, ways to develop a year long program that will ensure you ongoing progress. In that series, Dr. Andy Galpin provided an enormous amount of valuable information, such that anyone and everyone, meaning the person who's just interested in starting a fitness program or improving their existing fitness program, or the elite athlete who's interested in improving their sprint times or their jump height or their power lifting or their marathon time could clearly benefit from some or all of the protocols that he described.

Andrew Huberman: Now because that series is so extensive in terms of its depth and breadth, again providing so much value at zero cost, thanks to Dr. Andy Galpin's expertise. But at the same time, because it might be a little bit intimidating for many people out there to try and figure out which protocols to incorporate into their existing fitness regimen. I thought it would be fun and very beneficial to talk about some of the key tools that were described throughout that series that one could consider incorporating into their existing fitness routine. Now. So that's what this episode is really about. It's about the tools that I personally glean from those discussions and that I found to be of momentous value in improving both my cardiovascular fitness, my strength and hypertrophy training, my recovery, and other aspects of my overall fitness protocols. And when I say beneficial, I mean in terms of improving my cardiovascular fitness, improving my strength and hypertrophy training. And that have improved the various metrics of fitness, lifespan and health span, which include things like heart rate variability, resting heart rate, blood pressure, vo two max, as well as some of the fitness metrics that were described during that episode series with Dr. Andy Galpin, such as performance metrics.

Andrew Huberman: The ability to jump a certain distance, the ability to run a certain speed or to run a certain distance at a given speed. The ability to move weights in good form for a certain number of repetitions. Again, all of the metrics of performance and health are going to vary tremendously from person to person, depending on where you're starting, how long you've been training, and other aspects of your health. The tools described in today's episode are designed for everybody. Again, these are simple tools that you can put into your existing routine that should really move the needle forward in terms of improving your overall levels of fitness and health.
Andrew Huberman: The next category of tool to improve your fitness relates to breathing or respiration. Now, breathing and respiration is an enormous topic in and of itself. In fact, I did an entire episode on breathing and respiration, and this is a topic that my laboratory works on extensively as it relates to anxiety control and some other aspects of mental health, as well as to physical performance. For today's discussion, I want to just review a few tools that one can incorporate both into workouts and around workouts that can greatly enhance fitness and recovery. The first one is the type of respiration tool that you use between sets of exercise. And again, here we're talking about resistance training, but we could just as easily be talking about rest between rounds of, say, high intensity interval training. So, for instance, between bouts of sprinting on the track or the bike or the treadmill or the rower.

Andrew Huberman: A great pattern of breathing to incorporate during rest between sets is something that I've talked about before in other contexts, which is the physiological sigh. The physiological sigh is a deep inhale through the nose to maximally or near maximally inflate your lungs. And then a second, very brief inhale. And it's necessarily brief because your lungs are already pretty full to maximally inflate your lungs and to make sure that any of the little sacs, the little avioli of your lungs that have collapsed during the exercise exertion will reinflate and then a long exhale until lungs empty. So I'll demonstrate it right now, as I've done many times before. But if you haven't seen it or heard it before, it's two inhales followed by an extended exhale. And it goes like this. You'll notice that the inhales were through the nose and the exhale was through the mouth. That's the ideal way to do it for a number of reasons.

Andrew Huberman: Check out the episode that I did on respiration physiology, aka breathing, if you want more details on why that is. But two inhales through the nose and a long, extended exhale through the mouth. The so called physiological side, not named by Me but rather named by Physiologists in the 1930s, is, as far as we know, the fastest way to shift your nervous system from so called sympathetic drive to more parasympathetic drive, from a state of greater alertness to a state of greater calm. Now, the reason to do this between sets of resistance training is that the more that you can shift yourself from sympathetic drive to parasympathetic drive, that is, from alert to calm in between sets, the more energy and focus you can devote to exertion during your work sets. So one way to do this that's very convenient and very effective is to consider the last repetition of your set, a physiological PSI, which is not to say, okay, I want to be very clear, which is not to say that you should do the physiological PSI during your set.
Andrew Huberman: The next tool to improve your fitness is called exercise snacks. And as the name suggests this is a fun one and was suggested by Dr. Andy Galpin as a way to either enhance or maintain your fitness depending on how your core or foundational fitness program is going. So when I say core I don't mean your ABS, I mean whether or not you're getting your regular cardio and your regular resistance training. If you were to add one or several of these exercise snacks per week it can further improve things like vo, two, max, muscular endurance, et cetera. I'll talk about the specific snacks that you will be doing in a moment. However, as Dr. Andy Galpin also pointed out, there are times in which we happen to not be following our foundational fitness program either because work demands or family demands or we're traveling. We're simply not keeping up with our basic routine. And under those conditions exercise snacks are a terrific way to maintain the fitness that you've already built and developed and you don't lose any ground in a week, say, where you get particularly busy.

Andrew Huberman: Now exercise snacks can take on a variety of different forms, but for sake of simplicity and clarity today we're going to divide them into two major categories. The first category are exercise snacks that are going to improve or maintain your cardiovascular fitness. So your ability to run or cycle or row some distance, say twelve minutes or longer. Okay, but keep in mind these exercise snacks are very, very brief. They don't require that you do them for twelve minutes or longer. What they are going to do is either maintain or enhance the type of endurance that allows you to continue in an activity for twelve minutes or longer. The second category of exercise snack relates to muscular endurance. Muscular endurance is a very important aspect of fitness and even though some people are already training for muscular endurance, it's something that most people are not doing enough training for.

Andrew Huberman: Muscular endurance is your ability say, to maintain a wall sit or to maintain a plank or to do the maximum number of pushups that you can do in one session. The sort of drop to the floor and give me as many pushups as you possibly can type of thing or as many sit ups as you can type of thing. Muscular endurance translates to a number of other aspects of fitness and it's something that we should all be working on and again many people just don't make space for it in their regular routine. So now we have these two categories of exercise snacks. One geared toward enhancing or maintaining your cardiovascular fitness as it translates to longer duration endurance activity. So twelve minutes or longer, and then the other category is purely muscular endurance, which is essentially some bout of exercise that's going to be fairly brief, anywhere from a minute to two minutes, but certainly less than twelve minutes.
Andrew Huberman: So I already listed off a number of important documented benefits and benefits that I've certainly experienced by incorporating low repetition pure strength work into my yearly training cycle for periods of eight to twelve weeks. In addition to that, during my conversation with Dr. Andy Galpin, he said something very important for everyone to hear and understand. He said when you look at the data on aging and performance, in particular muscular performance, you see some very interesting patterns within the data. He said, for instance, that for every year after age 40, there's a 1% drop in muscle size that can be offset by resistance training, but that if you don't do resistance training, that you won't offset. And during that series, we also talked about the minimum requirement for six and probably more like ten working sets per muscle group per week in order to at least maintain muscle size, not just age 40 and beyond, but even at younger ages.

Andrew Huberman: Okay, so that's muscle size 1% decrease per year unless you do the right thing. And the right thing is get six to ten working sets per week in order to offset that decrease. And if you train properly for hypertrophy, yes, you can still increase muscle size past age 40. In addition, he said that there is a three to 5% reduction per year for every year past age 40 in strength and power. Now, that's a very important metric because what it's telling us is that the drop off in strength and power is significantly greater per each year after age 40 than is the decrease in muscle size, telling us that we have to do something to offset that decrease in strength and power. In addition, he mentioned that for every year past age 40 there is an eight to 10% decrease in speed and in explosiveness. And so if one is interested in maintaining speed of muscular movement and explosiveness of muscular movement, something that's perhaps important to a number of you, one also has to incorporate training specifically geared toward maintaining or improving speed and explosiveness.

Andrew Huberman: Now, I like many people, I'm not so interested in speed and explosiveness. I know they have their utility, but I am interested in maintaining muscle size over the course of my life, perhaps even adding some muscle to particular muscle groups. I'm also very interested in at least maintaining and ideally even gaining some strength in certain muscle groups throughout my entire lifespan. And that's not just for performance reasons. That's also because we know that maintaining or improving strength of our muscles is very important across the entire lifespan, but especially in the years spanning from 40 until death, which I think for most people fall somewhere between 50, 60, 70 or ideally out into the or hundreds, right? That's what we are all seeking is to die later in better health. And in order to do that, we have to dedicate some very specific training protocols in order to maintain or build strength. So to summarize, in addition to all the positive reasons to do dedicated strength training that I mentioned before, it's highly recommended that you do some dedicated strength training for the purposes of offsetting the age related decline in strength that occurs again three to 5% per year past age 40, which is a pretty significant decline. But the good news is, if you do the three to five protocol for, say, twelve weeks per year and then you continue to resistance train using other repetition ranges geared towards hypertrophy and strength or perhaps even muscular endurance, the good news is you'll maintain your strength and perhaps even build your strength, offsetting that natural decrease that would otherwise occur.
Andrew Huberman: And that's a really overarching theme of everything we've been discussing today, which is, yes, it's wonderful and important to have a core fitness program, something that you're really striving to do each and every week. And for me, that's three sessions of cardio, three resistance training sessions, and a day where I'm doing thermal stress training, which is just fancy language for deliberate cold and deliberate heat exposure. However real life happens travel, work, illness, family, all the sorts of things that can impinge on an exercise schedule and make it less likely that one would complete their workouts. So today we've been discussing tools to improve your fitness, which are brief, easy to incorporate, scientifically supported, and that are shown to improve the various sorts of exercise adaptations and recovery that will allow you to get the most progress from your schedule. So while the tools that we discuss today relate to breathing, they relate to nutrition, they relate to supplementation, they relate to specific set and rep patterns and cadences and rest periods, et cetera.

Andrew Huberman: All of those specific recommendations are within a larger container that I hope has become clear. Which is the best tools to improve your fitness are the tools that, of course, are going to be effective in improving your cardiovascular and strength and hypertrophy training, et cetera. Whatever it is that your goals are. But also tools that are going to make it easier and more likely that you are going to engage in your fitness program with enthusiasm, with effort, and with focus. And as with any episode of this podcast, I covered a lot of information and there are a lot of different tools that one could incorporate. By no means do you need to incorporate them all, although if you choose to, that's wonderful.

Andrew Huberman: Just even incorporating one or two of them, say incorporating this notion of the line and the exercise snacks, or adjusting your level of flexibility as to whether or not you train fasted or fed and the line, or trying a twelve week cycle of purely training for strength when you do your resistance training. But whether or not you pick one tool or all the tools, or somewhere in between, the key thing is to actually implement them. And I like to think that during today's discussion provided a number of tools, again, largely gleaned from the episode series with Dr. Andy Galpin's. And again, if you haven't seen that series that's linked in the show, note captions, those episodes are long, there are six of them, but they are a wealth of information of every aspect of fitness. During today's episode, we're really just talking about the things that you can and I do believe should bring to your existing fitness program that can really make a positive difference without a lot of effort.
Andrew Huberman: The reason I mentioned Rodio Rosa in this episode is that I realized that while some people might not yet be supplementing omega three S, they might not be supplementing creatine. There are many of you who are already doing those things, and you're looking for additional tools to give you an edge. So again, the rodeola rosa would not fall into the category of foundational supplements. Certainly get your nutrition right, get your sleep right, get your sunlight, all the basics first, please, before even thinking about any supplements. However, once you get into the category of supplements that can enhance fitness, rodeo rosa does seem to have some good research to support it in the context of lots of different forms of high intensity exercise.

Andrew Huberman: Now, I can't tell you whether or not it's purely subjective or whether or not it's objective and subjective, but my experience has been that when I take rodiola rosa, I definitely notice that I can exert myself harder without feeling like I'm bringing myself to the brink of fatigue, either during the exertion or afterwards. In other words, I feel like I can do more work without feeling so exhausted, and I feel as if I'm recovering from my workouts more quickly, in particular across the day after my workouts. In fact, if I had to cite one specific subjective effect that I've experienced from taking Rodeola Rosa before very high intensity workouts, is that prior to taking it, I would often find that three or 4 hours after the workout, having eaten a good meal, taken a shower, et cetera, and I was tired, I'd have a real dip in energy. But now I notice I have a lot of energy throughout the day, even after these very high intensity sessions in the early part of the day. And frankly, I haven't changed anything else about my supplementation or my nutrition, at least nothing major. So I personally am going to continue to take rodiola rosa before these high intensity workouts. So for me, that's about two or three times per week.

Andrew Huberman: However, if I forgot to take rodiola rosa before a workout, I have no reason to think that that workout would go much worse. This is a supplement that is designed to sort of give you an edge, to be able to exert more focus and intensity during your workouts with less perceived exertion and to enhance your recovery. The typical dosage of rodrilla rosa that you'll find in most supplements is 100 to 200 milligrams. And of course, anytime you're going to take a new supplement, you would be wise to figure out the lowest effective dose from that supplement. That's just logic, right? Why spend more money taking more of something that you don't need more of if you could get away with taking less of it? And it's just as effective, maybe even more effective. So I typically will take 100 to 200 milligrams of Rodolo rosa about ten to 20 minutes before a workout.

Andrew Huberman: However, I've taken as little as 100 milligrams on a consistent basis, and frankly, I don't really experience much difference whether I take 100 milligrams or I take 200 milligrams before a workout. So lately, I've just defaulted to taking 100 milligrams of rodeo or rosa before any high intensity workout.
Andrew Huberman: The next supplementation based tool for enhancing your fitness is rodiola Rosa. Now, this very esoteric sounding supplement is one that I learned about both from Dr. Lane Norton when he was a guest on this podcast, expert in nutrition and frankly, training as it relates to resistance training, and from Dr. Andy Galpin. rodiola Rosa is a supplement that's gaining increasing attention because it is what's called a cortisol modulator. It does not necessarily suppress cortisol. It does not increase cortisol. It's a cortisol modulator. And frankly, the mechanism by which rodiola Rosea modulates cortisol is still under investigation. I hope to do an episode about it in the future, or at least make it part of an episode, because the hypothesized mechanism that's starting to emerge is really interesting as it relates to neurons in the brain that control the stress response and glands in the body, like the adrenals that control the stress response. And that secrete cortisol.

Andrew Huberman: Regardless, there's a growing body of research that has explored rodiolo rosa supplementationbased tools. One's, subjective perception of fatigue or output during high intensity training of various kinds, both resistance training as well as running and endurance type training. So I started taking rodiola rosa about six months ago in response to conversations that I had, again with Dr. Lee Norton and with Dr. Andy Galpin. And it's a supplement that I take before high intensity workouts. So I don't take it before a run because frankly, my runs either very long and slow or they're very brief, like a high intensity interval training session. And I find those to be pretty easy to recover from, even though they are very intense. I might take a rodeola rosa supplement before doing a 30 minutes hill run. That's very intense. But typically I only take it about ten to 15 minutes before any sort of high intensity resistance training session, in particular my leg day, which falls on day two of my exercise protocol, or the torso day, or the small body parts day. Again, here I'm referencing the way that I train across the week, and you can find that training protocol as a downloadable, completely zero cost PDF if you like. But I realize other people are using different body part splits and different combinations of resistance training and endurance training.
Andrew Huberman: In round one, you are going to take two minutes. So you'll need to set a timer for two minutes and you're going to go the maximum distance that you can in that two minutes. So run the maximum distance that you can for two minutes or cycle the maximum distance that you can for two minutes or verse a climber the maximum distance that you can for two minutes. Whatever you select, you're going to do that as far and as fast as you can for the duration of two minutes. So depending on the movement. And depending on your level of fitness, that distance might be 400 meters, 600 meters, 800 meters, et cetera. Whatever distance you travel in that two minutes, you are going to mark that distance down in your mind or in your phone or on a piece of paper, and then you're going to rest two minutes. So two minutes of work, then rest two minutes.

Andrew Huberman: Then in round two, you're going to go the same distance that you did in round one and you're going to take as much time as you need to do that distance as fast as you can. So if you went 600 meters in two minutes for round one, in round two, you're going to go 600 meters and it's going to take you however long it takes you. Chances are, if you really did the best you could in round one, you were at maximum output for the first two minutes. That in round two, it's going to take you longer than two minutes to travel that equivalent distance. However, there is the possibility that it will take you less time, but for most people, it's going to take you more time. So staying with this example of 600 meters, in two minutes, on round one, in round two, you're going to go 600 meters. Let's say it takes you two minutes and 30 seconds. You then are going to mark down how long round two took you. So in this case, the example is two minutes and 30 seconds. Then you're going to rest another two minutes. And then in round three, you're going to go all out again as fast and as safely as you can for the same duration that you did in round two. And your goal is to go at least as far as you went in round one. And if there's still time left, you're going to continue to go all out again as fast as you safely can until the entire duration is completed. So it's really just three rounds with two rest periods in between round one and round three. And then I highly recommend that after round three, that you do some sort of dedicated cooldown, so instead of just flopping onto the bench or the floor or the lawn, that you walk around slowly until you recover your breathing.

Andrew Huberman: The reason I like the sugar cane as a tool that one implements once every, say, two to four weeks as a replacement for one's typical high intensity interval training is several fold. First of all, if you provide the right intensity in round one and round two and round three, it is sure to elevate your heart rate substantially and in doing so, improve your V O two max, which is correlated with all sorts of important metrics related to health, span, performance and lifespan. Second of all, it gamifies things a little bit. It pits you against yourself in the sense that if you go out at maximum speed again, performing a movement that you can safely perform at maximum speed in round one, well then you have something to compete against in round two and round three and that makes the high intensity interval training, first of all very intense. But also it makes it kind of fun in a way that lets you forget just how painful the whole thing is.
Andrew Huberman: I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, athletic greens. Athletic greens, now called AG one, is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that covers all of your foundational nutritional needs. I've been taking athletic greens since 2012, so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking athletic greens, and the reason I still take athletic greens once or usually twice a day, is that it gets to be the probiotics that I need for gut health. Our gut is very important. It's populated by gut microbiota that communicate with the brain, the immune system, and basically all the biological systems of our body to strongly impact our immediate and long term health. And those probiotics and athletic greens are optimal and vital for microbiotic health. In addition, Athletic Greens contains a number of adaptogens, vitamins and minerals that make sure that all of my foundational nutritional needs are met. And it tastes great.

Andrew Huberman: If you'd like to try athletic greens, you can go to Athleticgreens.com Huberman and they'll give you five free travel packs that make it really easy to mix up athletic greens while you're on the road, in the car, on the plane, et cetera, and they'll give you a year supply of vitamin D, three K two. Again, that's athletic greens huberman to get the five free travel packs and the year supply of vitamin D, three K two.
Andrew Huberman: The next tools to improve your fitness are psychological tools, and they're really geared toward enhancing your focus during your workout and separating or segmenting your workouts from the other parts of your day. Now, of course, workouts are naturally segmented from the other parts of your day, unless you're running around all day long or you're lifting weights or other heavy objects all day long. But one of the more attractive tools that was presented during the series with Dr. Galpin that I adopted and found to be really effective is this concept of the line. The line is this concept that you have a physical location, say at the entrance to a gym or at the start of your run or your bike, or maybe it's around the stationary exercise device that you use for which once you cross that line, you are all about business. Okay? You're not socializing, or at least not too much. You don't want to be rude to people, but you're really focused on your workout. So this is especially effective on days when you're a little bit distracted or you didn't sleep that well the night before or maybe you got something going on in mind or you're in an argument or you're excited about something else. But if you care about your fitness, which I hope everyone does, and your goal during any workout is to stimulate a particular type of physiological adaptation, strength, hypertrophy, long distance endurance, et cetera. And you also don't want to get injured so that you can continue to train for your entire life as regularly as possible.

Andrew Huberman: The concept of the line is fantastic because what it does is it forces you to compartmentalize the portion of your life that comes before the workout and after the workout and also to really enjoy your workouts. This is something that's not often discussed, but nowadays with the advent of smartphones, there's a lot of infiltration of other types of communication and information while one is supposed to be exercising. And so our life has become far less compartmentalized than it used to be before the advent of smartphones. Now, of course, smartphones are wonderful. They provide all sorts of wonderful tools and benefits and of course I use one and I'll talk about how to incorporate the smartphone in a very specific way to enhance your workouts in just a moment. But the idea of a line is you pick a location, it can change each workout, but ideally it would be at the threshold of where the physical location to the workout begins. And once you cross that line, you are all business.
Andrew Huberman: I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor, Inside Tracker. Inside Tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you meet your health goals. I'm a big believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long term health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. However, with a lot of blood tests out there, you get information back about blood, lipids, about hormones and so on, but you don't know what to do with that information. With Inside Tracker, they have a personalized platform that makes it very easy to understand your data, that is, to understand what those lipids, what those hormone levels, et cetera mean, and behavioral supplement, nutrition and other protocols to adjust those numbers to bring them into the ranges that are ideal for your immediate and long term health.

Andrew Huberman: Inside Tracker's ultimate plan now includes measures of both Apob and of insulin, which are key indicators of cardiovascular health and energy regulation. If you'd like to try Inside Tracker, you can visit Insidetracker.com Huberman to get 20% off any of Inside Tracker's plans. Again, that's Insidetracker.com Huberman to get 20% off.
Andrew Huberman: In general, zone two cardio is the sort that you can do while purely nasal breathing, unless you need to talk, of course, it's perfectly fine to talk while doing zone two cardio. And again, the scientific research tells us that we should all be getting at least 150 minutes and probably more like 200 minutes of zone two cardio per week. Now, in addition to that, a foundational or optimal fitness program for most people is going to include anywhere from two to four cardiovascular training sessions that are separate, that's right, separate from the zone two cardio, as well as two to four resistance or strength training, sometimes also aimed at hypertrophy or muscle growth training sessions. Now, we have to acknowledge that most people are probably not going to hit the upper threshold of all of those three things.

Andrew Huberman: Most people simply do not have the time and or discipline to get 200 minutes of zone two cardio per week plus four resistance training sessions, plus four cardiovascular training sessions that are separate from the zone two cardio. As a consequence, the optimal fitness program that I described in that episode, and by the way, it's the program that I've essentially followed for the last 30 years or more, includes three cardiovascular training sessions. So one longer duration, sort of typical endurance type training. This would be a long, slow jog or a long hike one day per week, as well as a shorter cardiovascular training session of about 25 to 30 minutes. Moving a bit faster, getting the heart rate up a bit. More breathing a little bit harder, as well as one very short cardiovascular training session that would fall under the category of high intensity interval training.

Andrew Huberman: Things like sprints, which don't necessarily have to be done running, could be done on a rower, could be done on a bike, et cetera. So three cardiovascular training sessions as well as three resistance training sessions. I want to acknowledge that resistance training can be done with body weight, can be done with weights, with machines. I talked about the differing virtues of one approach versus another, but nonetheless, three resistance training sessions, one focusing specifically on leg training, one focused specifically on torso training, that's right, chest, shoulders and back altogether, as well as some neck training for important reasons that were mentioned in that episode. And then a third session that was aimed at somewhat smaller body parts, biceps, triceps, calves, and some other small body parts that tend to be neglected and that are important to train if one wants to encourage muscular balance, both aesthetically and structurally, to avoid injury and have excellent posture. So those were the core elements of that foundational fitness program. And I mentioned then, and I'll mention again now, that that program is not a mandate, it is not an absolute requirement for anyone to follow.
Andrew Huberman: Let's talk about tools to improve your fitness. Before we do that, however, I just want to briefly remind everybody what constitutes a core or a foundational fitness program. Now, what I'm about to describe is not for the athlete that's trying to just improve one aspect of fitness or sports performance. So, for instance, if you are a power lifter and your main goal is to move more weight on the core powerlifting movements, or if you are somebody training for a marathon, it's likely that your core fitness program will differ substantially from what I'm about to describe. However, the vast majority of you are almost certainly trying to have some level of cardiovascular fitness. So the ability perhaps to run a mile or more certainly to be able to walk up a flight of stairs without getting winded, you almost certainly want some degree of strength, the ability to perhaps pick up a heavy load of groceries and carry it in one arm as you carry something else in the other arm.

Andrew Huberman: You want the ability to help move furniture. You want the ability certainly to not injure yourself when performing daily tasks. And perhaps you also want to be able to go out and play a pickup game of basketball or soccer or to go out on a long hike with the family without feeling so sore that you have to rest in bed the next day. An optimal fitness program of the sort that was covered in the optimal fitness protocols episode that I did is therefore one that checks off the major boxes that science tells us are important for health span and for lifespan, and that can also help us improve various aspects of performance and improve various aspects of aesthetics, whether it's fat loss or muscle growth. If we choose. So, without going into that program in a lot of detail, the core elements of it are that it include at least 150 minutes and ideally more like 200 minutes per week of so called zone two cardio. I'll talk a little bit more about zone two cardio a little bit later in the episode. But zone two cardio is for those of you that don't know the type of cardiovascular exercise that you can do while maintaining a conversation without getting winded, but that if you were to push a little bit harder that you would find it hard to complete your sentences.
Andrew Huberman: The next tool I'm about to describe relates to your cardiovascular training and it's a tool that can greatly improve your cardiovascular fitness with a limited amount of time commitment. But that is not to say it is easy. What I'm referring to is the so called sugar cane. If you listen to the series with Dr. Andy Galpin, you may recall our discussion about the sugar cane, which is so named after our friend and expert trainer Kenny Cain. And it is a very efficient, yet somewhat brutal way to increase your cardiovascular output. So the sugar cane is the type of protocol that you would incorporate once in the period of a week, but certainly not every week. It's the kind of thing that you might throw in once every two weeks or once every four weeks. As a replacement for your other high intensity interval training, the sugar cane involves selecting some form of exercise that you can do at high intensity safely. That, of course, will differ between individuals.

Andrew Huberman: For some of you, it will be a stationary bike, for others of you, it will be a road bike, for others of you, it will be running, and for others of you, it will be rowing. The exact form of exercise is not important. What is important is that you can generate a lot of intensity. So you're going to be doing some sprint like work, although not all out sprints, except on the final round. I'll explain where all this is going in a moment, but again, you need to select a movement that you can do without injuring yourself while still performing a movement at high intensity. So for me, that would be running, for you, it might be something else. The sugar cane is pretty straightforward in structure. It involves three rounds, after a brief warm up, of course. So you're going to do three to five minutes of jogging or jumping jacks or skipping rope, something to get your core body temperature up so that you're prepared to do the high intensity work. And then there are only three rounds of high intensity work and they go as the following.
Andrew Huberman: The second tool that I've incorporated into my fitness regimen and that I believe can be of great benefit to frankly everybody, is to start including low repetition, pure strength work. Now some of you may already be doing low repetition, pure strength work, but I believe that most people don't. Most people who do resistance training are using either machines or free weights or some combination of those, or perhaps are using body weight. And they tend to focus on repetition ranges from about five and usually more like six repetitions out to about ten and perhaps 15 repetitions. Now of course, doing resistance training in repetition ranges of five to 15 reps per set, provided it's done at sufficient intensity. So either to failure or close to failure, of course, in good form is tremendously beneficial. It can help build strength, it can enhance hypertrophy. There is tremendous value to training in those repetition ranges. But when I sat down with Dr. Andy Galpin to discuss resistance training specifically, he made it very clear that at least for some portion of one's yearly training cycle so perhaps eight weeks or ten weeks, or in the case that I adopted, twelve weeks, there is tremendous benefit to training in the three to five repetition range, and maybe even lower. So the second tool of training specifically for strength in this three to five repetition range is something that I started to incorporate after I sat down to record that series. And I'll just tell you a few of the benefits that I've experienced and then I'll tell you the specific protocol that makes it very easy to do this.

Andrew Huberman: The most obvious benefit to me was that I got much stronger and that that strength persisted. Such that when I went back to using higher repetition ranges. So typically I trained with weights or machines in the six to ten repetition range, sometimes a little higher, sometimes a little lower. But never before had I specifically trained in the three to five repetition range exclusively for a period of ten to twelve weeks. And when I did that I of course gained strength. But that strength stayed with me such that when I returned to higher repetition ranges I could use more weight in good form. And that, of course, enhanced strength and hypertrophy further. In addition, there was another effect that was at least to me, very unexpected, which was that my cardiovascular training improved significantly. Now why would this be? Because typically a three to five repetition set does not elevate the heart rate for long enough that you would consider it cardiovascular training. And of course the rest periods between those sets is pretty long as well. So even if heart rate goes up during those heavy sets, it's going to go down during those long three to five minute rest periods between those sets. But what I noticed was that my overall posture and my ability to maintain cardiovascular output while using good running form or good rowing form was also vastly improved. And the logical interpretation of why that would be is simply that the muscles got stronger and those same muscles are being incorporated into the cardiovascular, let's call it endurance work that I'm doing on other days. And therefore I can carry out those cardiovascular training sessions in better form for longer periods of time.
Andrew Huberman: You are taking care of business. Which is not to say that you can't enjoy your workouts, in fact, you absolutely should. One of the best pieces of advice that I ever got about fitness was given to me when I was a teenager and I started lifting weights. And the person who was teaching me how to do that said, one of the best things that you can do and you absolutely should do for your fitness now and forever is to learn to enjoy training hard. And that really stuck with me. I really do enjoy training hard, but that was something that I learned how to do over time. I took on the mentality that I'm here by choice. I'm here for my own good and my own fitness to enhance my life. So I'm going to enjoy training hard, I'm going to enjoy training effectively. And of course, there are days when I train a little less hard where I back off quite a bit. I even take rest periods of a week every once in a while.

Andrew Huberman: Every, say twelve to 16 weeks, I'll take a week off and just do some activities like hiking and things of that sort. I talked to all about extended layoffs, meaning a layoff of more than two days during the episode that I did by myself, which is the foundational Fitness protocol episode. But in any case, learning to train hard and enjoy training hard and really making the workout something that is separate from the rest of your life is one of the most gratifying things that you can do to enhance. Your overall fitness because it really teaches you how to designate your mind and your body toward this one specific set of goals while you are there and to really enjoy the process. Because fitness can be a truly enjoyable process even when you are exerting yourself especially hard. And for you masochists out there, it can be especially because you're training hard that it feels so good.

Andrew Huberman: In any event, the key is to set some sort of boundary and know that when you cross into that boundary, you're training and when you cross out of that boundary, you're done training, which also lends itself to more adequate recovery. And the decompression type breathing exercises that we talked about before. I'm not going to tell you whether or not you need to do the down regulation breathing at the end of your workout within the line or after you cross the line. That's up to you. I don't think one needs to get that specific.
Andrew Huberman: The three by five protocol is very straightforward. It involves doing three to five exercises per workout. Okay? So if it's a workout for legs, it's three to five exercises. If it's a workout for some upper body muscle, it's three to five exercises. Three to five exercises for three to five sets per exercise, three to five repetitions per set, and three to five minutes of rest between each set. In addition, he emphasized that one can do those workouts three to five times per week. Although I'm going to put in asterisks next to that last statement, because I found that I couldn't do the three by five protocol, say, for legs, specifically three to five times per week. I realize that might be possible for some people, but I'm somebody who like. Many of you out there either doesn't have the time or doesn't have the recovery capacity to train my legs three to five times per week.

Andrew Huberman: Even though I acknowledge that there are probably ways to do that that would still allow me to recover, it just simply starts to impede into other areas of training. It starts to impede other areas of life, like work and family and sleep and all the rest. So what I did, and what I'm suggesting you try, is for any existing resistance training that you're doing to take a period of eight or ten or ideally twelve weeks, and do the vast majority, if not all of that resistance training in the lower repetition range. That's designed specifically to induce strength adaptations and to not pay attention to whether or not you're hitting that same muscle group three to five times per week. Rather, if you train your legs once or twice per week to simply do all of the work for your legs in that three to five repetition range, if you train an upper body muscle or muscle groups, chest, shoulders, back once per week or twice per week, to just stay within that three to five repetition range.

Andrew Huberman: For those work sets, right warm ups can include a few more reps. And then to adhere to this, three to five exercises, three to five sets per exercise, three to five repetitions per set, and three to five minutes between sets. Now, the one exception to this that I incorporated was that for very small muscle groups, so for instance, the rear deltoids, or for neck work, or for calf work, to not rely purely on three to five repetitions, but maybe to work in a range of anywhere from five to eight repetitions. So still fairly low repetitions, but not so low that it restricts you to three to five repetitions. The reason for that is that I, and I think a lot of people out there, find it hard to fatigue those smaller muscle groups adequately with good form when restricting oneself to those low repetitions. However, for big compound movements like presses and squats and deadlifts and glute ham raises and things of that sort.
Andrew Huberman: What he said was, look, if you want to schedule zone two cardio and head out for a long Sunday jog or hike, terrific. If you want to schedule zone two cardio as two or more sessions on the treadmill or on the bike, great. But that he doesn't actually think of zone two cardio as exercise at all. And to that I gasped. And then I was a little bit deflated. I thought, oh great, I'm doing all this zone two cardio and you don't even consider that exercise? And then what he said was very reassuring and I think it's going to be very reassuring to all of you. He said, first of all, zone two cardio is absolutely critical to our health for a number of reasons that I already mentioned. But in addition to that, zone two cardio does not impede and in fact can enhance our other aspects of fitness. So, for example, our strength training, our hypertrophy training, or any type of speed work or other types of cardiovascular training one might do. And that the best way to get zone two cardio is, okay, if you want to schedule it, schedule it as a session. But that to simply increase the amount of walking, and in particular walking at a rapid pace that one does, and to increase the total amount of movement that one's getting throughout the week. So taking groceries in and out of the grocery store, running around with the kids, taking a walk with a coworker while having a work discussion, taking your calls for work while pacing in the office or going outside.

Andrew Huberman: What he impressed on me is that zone two cardio can be meshed throughout the daily activities that I and everybody else generally have to do. And this was of great relief to me because I, as many of you are, am extremely busy. I don't have time to schedule in more cardio per week. Or at least I don't see the way I could do that without reducing the amount of sleep that I'm getting or without reducing the amount of social connection that I'm getting with family and friends, both of which are extremely important to our mental health and physical health. So the basic tool here is, yes, get 200 minutes per week minimum of zone two cardio. And notice I said 200 minutes, not 150 minutes to 200 minutes. I'm going to set the higher threshold of 200 minutes per week minimum of zone two cardio. But that you don't need to schedule that as time on the treadmill if you want to, great. But what was communicated to me from Dr. Andy Galpin is that zone two cardio is immensely beneficial.

Andrew Huberman: It's not going to impede and in fact it's going to improve other aspects of fitness and that it does not have to impede and it in fact can improve other aspects of our daily life, like our ability to engage socially, our ability to have a great output at work in whatever type of work you do. So the message is very simple, get 200 minutes or more of zone two cardio per week. And the message is also a very reassuring one, which is that that zone two cardio can be spread throughout your daily activities and that if you're doing enough of it, you probably don't even have to count the total amount of zone two cardio that you're getting. If you simply make the effort to move around a lot more during your daily activities and to mesh that zone two cardio with your daily activities, you're going to hit that threshold of 200 minutes per week, minimum. Now that's a great message for me because I'm already doing the three resistance training workouts per week. I'm doing what?

Andrew Huberman: Now I can just call the two other cardiovascular training workouts per week because now I don't even count that long Sunday jog or Sunday hike as exercise. I just consider that movement out of doors on the weekend. And in doing so it's also allowed me to really enjoy that a lot more. There's something about considering something, a fitness training program that shifts it from just recreation and enjoying life to training. And I of course love training. I love training in the gym and I love training out ofdoors, I love running, I love lifting weights, I love all sorts of physical training. I know many people do, I know many people don't. But if one looks at zone two cardio as just part of their daily life, you're far more likely to get that zone two cardio in and all the benefits that come with it. And you're also opening up time for work, for social engagements and to do and pay attention to other aspects of fitness, which is what we're going to talk about next.
Andrew Huberman: To the point where focus during sets becomes harder to achieve at the beginning of a set. Because in between sets I was focused on a conversation, not on training. I'm a big believer in making your exercise fun, making it accessible, meaning not so expensive or geographically difficult to achieve that you don't do it, or that it starts to interfere with other areas of life. This is really important. You want fitness to be blended with the rest of your life, but you don't want it so blended with the rest of your life that the rest of your life starts to impede your efforts. Or, and this happens quite often for a lot of people, that workouts start to take an hour and a half, 2 hours, when they could easily be completed in 45 minutes to an hour if you were just more efficient with your time. And of course, you don't need me to tell you this, but smartphones can be one of the major bleeds on our focus and efficiency. In fact, it can cause you to hemorrhage focus and efficiency. So what I'm suggesting here is not throwing away your smartphone, although some people do benefit from just leaving it in the car or at home when they are training, but rather to designate podcasts, books, music playlists for that particular workout and to just stick to those for the duration of your workout. And once you cross into the line, that's what you're listening to, and only that or nothing. And of course, once you cross back over the line as you finish your workout, you can decide to continue to listen to the podcast or continue to listen to the audiobook or to the music.

Andrew Huberman: That's up to you. Although I highly recommend that you do incorporate that down regulation period of three to five minutes minimum. The last category of tools to improve your fitness come from the discussions about nutrition and supplementation and recovery in the series with Dr. Andy Galpin. Now, the list of tools I'm about to describe is not exhaustive, meaning it doesn't even begin to come close to the total number of tools that one could glean from the discussion about nutrition and supplementationbased tools I had with Dr. Andy Galpin on this podcast. But they are the major ones that are definitely worth knowing, and those include supplementing with omega three fatty acids.
Andrew Huberman: I would consider myself one of those people. You may be somebody in that category as well or you might be somebody who really feels as if you run best, you resistance train best when you've eaten, say, 90 minutes or a couple of hours before you do that. There are basically no specific rules as it relates to whether or not you train fasted or train fed except what you can handle in terms of gastric distress. So you'll want to make food choices according to that and try and avoid of course gastric distress. But basically the change that I've made is if I wake up and I'm hungry, I'll eat a small meal or if I want to work out in the afternoon or I have to work out in the afternoon and I have lunch at, say, twelve or 1230 or 11:00 A.m, and the only opportunity that I have to train is 01:00 P.m or even 1230, I will go ahead and train. And that's a new thing for me. Typically I try to keep my meals at least three to 4 hours prior to any training bout. And of course if you're sleeping all night you're not eating and then if you wake up and you don't eat and you train in the morning, that's certainly longer than three or 4 hours unless you're sleeping very, very little, frankly. So essentially what I'm saying is figure out what works best for you.

Andrew Huberman: Do you prefer to train fasted or Fed? For some of you you might prefer fasted before cardio and Fed before resistance training. For some of you it might be fasted is always best. Again, I put myself in that category. For some of you it might be Fed is always best. Again, this is highly individual and that's another point that I'm trying to make here, which is Dr. Galpin really impressed upon me that there is no hard and fast rule about training fasted or fed. And this is the second point that having some flexibility in whether or not you can train fasted or fed allows you to incorporate your fitness training sessions more readily into a shifting schedule.
Andrew Huberman: This is very helpful, I'm going to work on it. But can we say that an effective way to start off in terms of creatine during repetitions would be to take a gulp of air during the lowering phase, the eccentric phase, and then to exhale during the concentric exertion phase. I asked that because that's what I've been doing for a while and it makes me feel safe. I don't know if I am. Andy it allows me to exhale as I exert the hardest portion of the exercise. And perhaps I also borrowed that from martial arts, where one tendons most often is trained to exhale on the strike.

Andy Galpin: If you're going to be doing again, the number of repetitions can be completed without a breath. A lot of times you're better off saving that exhalation until you complete.

Andrew Huberman: Well, but you don't have to. But for a reasonably heavy set of hack squats or even leg extensions, and given that I already can't leg extension my body weight, maybe we establish maybe this is why the idea of holding my breath for an entire compound set. So again, I'm bringing to mind where is my insurance card, who's going to drive me to the hospital, this kind of thing. In all seriousness, what if I want to breathe during the set?

Andy Galpin: Yeah, so I'll clarify, I'm generally meaning if you're doing like a one rep max or something like that.

Andrew Huberman: Okay, so certainly I could hold my breath for a one repetition maximum, maybe.

Andy Galpin: Like a double or something like that, depending on what you're doing, like maybe Aaaa bench press, you can probably do three and get away with it. A squat. It gets harder deadlift. So it kind of depends on the exercise. You want to take that breath, though, prior to the eccentric portion, not during. So creatine, lower creatine in lock. We're set. And now start our movement pattern. Wherever it's going to be exhaling on the concentric portion during it is fine. It's no problem, especially if you're not extremely heavy.

Andrew Huberman: Andy, what are your thoughts on grunting and screaming?

Andy Galpin: Yeah, fine, I don't care.

Andrew Huberman: I don't tend to do that. I'm occasionally known to squeal or whimper, but I do, that matches your personal. But I do it very quietly.

Andy Galpin: I think of you and I think squeal whimper absolutely. Thanks. If you're going to be doing multiple repetitions, what we actually do for the NFL Combine is we teach them a very specific Excel strategy. So there's one test that they do, which is they bench press 225 for as many reps as possible. A lot of these people will get 25 to 40 repetitions. So we have a very specific breathing pattern. It would be something like if we think that they're going to do around 25 reps, say, that's like our goal. We might say, okay, do the first ten without a breath and then exhale, reset, and then do five breath. And then you might do five breath, three breath, two breath, and then one breath per rep until we can't get anymore. So we'll have very specific strategies for them. So what I would say is think about how many you're going to complete and then breathe according to that. And it tends to increase in frequency as the number gets closer to failure, because you're going to want that error a little bit, but you just want to make sure that when you're breathing back in, you're in a safe spot. So you don't want to be catching that rebreath when the weight's on you.

Andy Galpin: You want to be in a locked out position or away from you or when you're standing. So it tends to be like at the end of the exercise, not in the middle of it, which is going to be a recipe for problems. If you take your breath, then one.
Peter Attia: Biggest pet peeves is and my team knows this because sometimes they'll occasionally they'll do this and I'll have to remind them. You Peter, talk about a relative risk change without an absolute risk accommodating. It right? So what does that look like? So the relative risk increase of breast cancer in the estrogen plus MPA group versus the placebo was 25 27%, and that became the only headline, HRT increases Risk of Breast Cancer by 27%. Now, I don't think that's true at all today, but let's even look at the data. What was the arr? What was the absolute risk increase? It was a difference between five cases per 1004 cases per thousand. So the Arr was 0.1%, one case in a thousand. And it's true, going from four in a thousand to five in a thousand is a 25% increase, but it's a completely inappropriate context.

Andrew Huberman: I agree, and I feel like headlines of that sort, which have come up recently around various dietary interventions, we won't go there, at least for the time being, are nothing short of criminal because they really distort people's thinking. But also they steer the course of science and medicine for, as you pointed out, for decades, if not longer, and they can really take us off our health track in serious ways.

Peter Attia: So I'll bring this meandering to a close. Which is to say, even though I could spend the next hour talking about all of the ways in which this study was flawed and all of the very unethical things that were done by a number of the investigators, who went out of their way to mask the truth of this study from the world. I'll tell a woman today we're going to start you on this. When you're going through menopause, we're using bioidentical hormones. And if your upper bound risk of breast cancer is one case in 1000, you should at least weigh that against all of the other benefits which I'll talk about. Now, there's something else I want to say, because a moment ago I alluded to the fact that I think the MPA might have been the biggest issue in that study. So there were two findings in that study that were negative. One was the small increase in the risk of heart disease and the small increase in the risk of breast cancer. But consider the other group we forgot about, the group that didn't have a uterus because remember, those women got estrogen only versus placebo.

Peter Attia: What was the difference in breast cancer there? Well, this is interesting because it didn't reach statistical significance, but its p value was zero six or zero seven. So it came very close, but it was in the opposite direction. It was a 24% risk reduction, about one in 1000 as well. So when you had estrogen plus MPA, you had barely statistically significant. The p value was zero five. So it just hit statistical significance, one in a thousand cases for breast cancer, and then you had one in a thousand cases, but p value of zero seven for reduction of risk of breast cancer, which to me suggests that the MPA, the synthetic progesterone, was playing more of a role than anything else. The second thing I point out is oral estrogen, which we no longer use, does increase coagulability. It does increase the ability of the blood to clot a little bit. And when we look at the more recent data on HRT using topical estrogen or patches of estrogen, we don't see that at all. In fact, we see the opposite now. So now we see the risk of heart disease going down in women with estradiol.

Andrew Huberman: And some women will be arriving to those treatments with mutations and things like factor five, litin and other clotting factors. Is it appropriate to say that everyone, both male and female, should know whether or not they. Have mutant forms of factor five Lidin.

Peter Attia: We don't typically test people for factor five. My wife actually has it, but we didn't learn it until she had help syndrome giving birth to our first daughter. But we kind of look for more family history, reason to be testing, things like that. We take a pretty detailed family history, so we'll kind of look for clotting issues there.

Andrew Huberman: So your reflex nowadays is to put women on these topical estrogen to basically have the discussion.
Andrew Huberman: A lot or at least when they urinate, it seems like a large volume of urine from what I've observed.

Peter Attia: You have a lot of experience with this?

Andrew Huberman: No, but my sister rode horses for a little while. My high school girlfriend had a horse, and that thing, I mean, the peas were legendary. Male horse.

Peter Attia: Yeah, the conjugated equine estrogen is the estrogen that's collected from female horses. And then it says synthetic progesterone. And I said to the person, I said, well, why didn't you use what we use today, which is bioidentical estrogen and progesterone? Like today when we put women on estrogen, it's an FDA product called the Vivel Dot. So it's a patch that you just put on and it's estradiol, but it's bioidentical estradiol, and we use what's called micronized progesterone. So bioidentical progesterone. And she said, well, at the time we just wanted to test what was currently being used. And I said, totally makes sense. But again, now you have four considerations that you have to keep in mind. Okay? So despite those four considerations, and I'm going to make a case for you why? I think the MPA created a real problem in that study, the synthetic progesterone.

Peter Attia: When the preliminary results were first made available, but not yet peer reviewed and not yet published, there was a huge fiasco, huge press announcement about it suggesting that the women receiving the cee plus MPA in the group with the uterus had a higher incidence of breast cancer. And that basically became the headline that never went away, though it turned out not to be true. Let's talk about the numbers. What was the increase in the risk of breast cancer in that group? Which gets to my one of my if you've ever listened to me on the podcast rail on something, listen, I.

Andrew Huberman: Have about 3800 pet peeves and counting. My laboratory staff know these, know a good number of them. You do not have to apologize for having many pet peeves, because as long as they have experience and data to support them, it provides one of my.
Andrew Huberman: Now, omega three fatty acids are found, of course, in foods, things like fatty fish and krill of all things, certain forms of algae, et cetera. But most people do not get enough of so called EPA form of omega three s. And for that reason, I and many other people choose to supplement with a minimum of 1 gram per day, and in some cases as high as 2 grams per day of omega three s in supplement form. So typically, one would get to one to 2 grams of EPA by supplementing their nutrition, their diet, that is, with fish oil capsules or liquid fish oil. There are many different sources of these. That was discussed in an episode that I did with Dr. Ronda Patrick. I find that it's most cost efficient to get that one to 2 grams of EPAs from liquid fish oil. Despite what you might see on the internet. I don't have any relationship whatsoever to a liquid fish oil company. You just want to make sure that you go with a reputable brand.

Andrew Huberman: I like the ones that are flavored with lemon so that it offsets the taste of fish oil, and I'll take a tablespoon or two of that per day. And if I'm traveling and even if I'm not, I will often use fish oil capsules. And there are a variety of different sources of those as well. Getting sufficient amounts of omega three has been shown to be important for mood, okay? So as a way to offset depression, but also for enhancing overall mood, that probably relates to the omega three s effect on neurotransmission. Not just for neuromodulators like serotonin and dopamine, but for all neurotransmission. And neurotransmission, of course, is essential for neuromuscular performance. And the omega three s have been implicated in reducing the inflammation response, cardiovascular health, et cetera.

Andrew Huberman: I realize that there is some debate about omega three s, but when I look at the bulk of literature about the omega three s, it's very clear to me that getting one to 2 grams of EPA form of omega three per day is the right thing for me to do. And many others find that as well.
Andrew Huberman: In fact, I recommend you do not do that, but rather if you're doing six repetitions of a given exercise and you, let's say fail on the 6th, or you do that 6th repetition and you're just close to failure. Because again, your work set should be to failure or close to it most of the time, then set down the weight and then you're going to do the next repetition as the physiological PSI, meaning you're not going to do the movement. You're going to think of doing a physiological PSI as the last repetition of every set, not during the last repetition of the resistance training movement. Okay? So the physiological sigh is something you do at the beginning of the rest period immediately following a set. If you'd rather think about it that way because it's more convenient than thinking about it as the last rep of a set, be my guest, whatever works for you. But what you'll quickly find is that if you do a physiological sigh right after completing your last repetition, you'll calm down much more quickly, your heart rate will come down more quickly, and you'll recover more completely in whatever designated rest period you've allowed yourself.

Andrew Huberman: Whether or not it's 30 seconds, which will be very short, frankly, or it's a five minute period of rest between sets, if you do one truly just one physiological side, at the beginning of the rest period, you are going to effectively shift your nervous system in the direction you want it to go during those rest periods. And of course, if you're training hard during your work sets, you run zero risk whatsoever of feeling so calm that you don't feel motivated to do your next set. I promise you that it will allow you to relax more at the beginning of the rest period than you ordinarily would to shift into a state of rest. There are differing opinions about whether or not you should walk around or stay still during your rest periods. I like to walk around a bit and stay standing. I'm not one of these people that kind of collapses into a C shape on the bench in between sets. I like to stand up and breathe normally, walk around, drink a little water, et cetera.

Andrew Huberman: In any case, doing a physiological side, the beginning of each rest interval between work sets of resistance training is a very effective way to enhance your focus and your output during your work sets. Now, the last respiration tool to improve your fitness is, again a tool gleaned from the discussion with Dr. Andy Galpin, and that's to include a three to five minute period at the end of every single workout. So it doesn't matter if it's high intensity interval training or it's resistance training or it's a long run of some sort at the end of every workout to take three to five minutes. So you'll want to set a timer and to do some form of parasympathetic that is calming promoting breathing in order to shift your nervous system from a state of heightened alertness and output into a state of recovery. Because, as you all well know by now, you get fitter not during your workouts, but rather after your workouts, in between workouts. So you stimulate the adaptation during a workout, but you get the adaptation, you get the actual improvement in between workouts. And a common mistake that many people make, and I made this mistake for years, was to finish a great workout. And then you're texting on your phone, or you're talking on the phone and you're driving home.
Andrew Huberman: It's of course to do this while not getting injured and it is entirely compatible with an existing exercise program. It in no way is going to impede your performance in strength or hypertrophy or other forms of long form endurance or high intensity interval training. Quite to the contrary, everything we know about these exercise snacks is that they enhance various aspects of your physiology in ways that promote both recovery and performance in your other types of exercise and your other types of athletic endeavors. So no reason to think that they are going to be problematic for your training. But of course, don't trip, don't fall, don't undertake a movement that puts you into a range of motion that has you hurting your back or your knee or any other part of your body. Start off slowly and find something that really works for you. So these are very easy, they take very little time, they're fun to be honest. And as was discussed in the conversation with Dr. Andy Galpin, they're also very effective.

Andrew Huberman: The second category of exercise snack are the exercise snacks that enhance muscular endurance. So muscular endurance is the type of endurance that allows you to maintain a fixed position for some period of time, usually somewhere between one and three minutes. But these endurance bouts are never going to last twelve or more minutes unless you are exceptionally evolved in terms of your muscular endurance abilities. What I'm talking about here are things like planks, wall sits, maximum number of pushups, things of that sort. And this is an aspect of fitness that translates to other aspects of fitness in a very important way. And again, this was covered in the exercise series with Dr. Andy Galpin. I don't want to go into any of the details now because it was all covered there. It's very easy to look up because it's timestamped. But just in brief, muscular endurance allows the buildup of more microvascular supply to muscles and connective tissue in a way that allows delivery and removal of more nutrients and waste products.

Andrew Huberman: Now, I realized to the physios, things like nutrients and waste products is far too broad a category. But what we're talking about here is the ability to deliver more fuel and oxygen and to remove waste products of muscular effort, or to be more specific, neuromuscular effort. This is a great thing because it can help you enhance your strength training, enhance your hypertrophy training, enhance your long distance endurance, and your middle distance, and even your short distance endurance. And these exercise snacks for building muscular endurance are exceedingly easy to do. And you can even do them while talking on the phone, especially if you're using headphones or if you have your phone on speaker. A good example of an exercise snack for muscular endurance would be a 30 to 62nd or perhaps longer wall sit. So remember, wall sits. Wall sits are, as the name suggests, where you put your feet out some distance from a wall, you squat down into a seated position, but there's no chair there. And then you maintain that seated position, and that is harder to do over time.
Andrew Huberman: Okay, let's talk about the tools to improve your fitness. The first tool is to mesh your Zone Two cardio with your daily activities. So for those of you that don't know, zone two cardio is the type of movement that we typically call cardio exercise that elevates your heart rate somewhat, increases your breathing somewhat, but that still allows you to carry out a conversation without having to pause or to gasp in order to complete your sentences. Okay? So that's a general rule of thumb for Zone Two cardio. Now, for those of you that use a fitness tracker, you can monitor whether or not you are in Zone Two cardio very precisely. But if you're like me and you don't use a fitness tracker, it's very easy to know if you're in Zone Two cardio because again, it's that level of output that puts you right below, or somewhat below the threshold where if you were to exert yourself with any more intensity that you wouldn't be able to complete your sentences.

Andrew Huberman: Now, this could of course be evaluated by jogging with someone or walking with someone or hiking with someone and carrying out a conversation if somebody isn't available. You could of course do this by trying to speak out loud and have a conversation with yourself. Or if you want another way to monitor whether or not you're in Zone Two cardio without having to use a fitness tracker, you could simply ask yourself whether or not you are maintaining a level of output that increases your heart rate and your breathing, but that allows you to maintain purely nasal breathing the entire time. Any of those approaches will tell you more or less whether or not you're in Zone Two cardio. Now, the scientific data tell us that we should all be getting anywhere from 150 minutes to 200 minutes per week minimum of Zone Two cardio for sake of cardiovascular health, cerebral vascular health, and a number of other aspects of health that are important essentially to everybody for health span and lifespan.

Andrew Huberman: Now, many people, including myself, schedule Zone Two cardio into their weekly fitness regimen. So for me, I have one day a week. For me, it falls on a Sunday where I go out for a jog that lasts anywhere from 60 minutes to 90 minutes. It's a slow jog. I can maintain nasal breathing the entire time or have a conversation with somebody else or myself the entire time if I like. Or sometimes it consists of a hike by myself or with other people. And sometimes those hikes extend anywhere from an hour to 4 hours, depending on the circumstances, et cetera. I will mention that whenever possible, I try and do that once a week, zone Two cardio session out of doors because I like being in nature and I like getting sunlight and I like getting fresh air. Now, during the discussion with Dr. Andy galpin I explained how I get my zone two cardio and I acknowledged that that once a week session doesn't always allow me to reach that 150 minutes to 200 minutes minimum threshold of zone two cardio per week. Sometimes it does, sometimes it doesn't. And his response to that was very reassuring.
Andrew Huberman: Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and sciencebased tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today we are discussing ways to improve your fitness. In particular, we are going to discuss tools that you can incorporate into your existing fitness routine that will allow you to make significant improvements without having to invest a lot of extra time. Most all of the tools we are going to discuss today were gleaned from the six episodes that we did with Dr. Andy Galpin. We provide a link to those full episodes in the show. Note captions of course. Now those episodes included a very large number of protocols, everything from how to build a fitness routine to how to enhance recovery, nutrition, and supplementationbased tools and routines aimed specifically at strength or hypertrophy or endurance or building anaerobic capacity.

Andrew Huberman: What I've done is to select key protocols from those episodes that I myself have started to incorporate into my existing fitness routine and that I think will be especially beneficial and frankly, fun for you to incorporate into your fitness routine. Now, a little bit later in this episode, I review the key components of any fitness program, that is, the number and type of cardiovascular training sessions and resistance training sessions that are essential for everyone to include as a template or a foundation for their overall fitness program. Now, a little bit later in the episode, I will be sure to review what are the essential components of any fitness program. So the number and type of resistance training sessions, the number and type of cardiovascular training sessions, as well as some of the elements of how those are arranged to ensure proper and adequate recovery between sessions so that you can continue to make ongoing progress.

Andrew Huberman: However, the bulk of today's discussion is going to focus on tools that you can use again very easily, very quickly, in some cases even saving you time during your fitness regimen, in order to improve all aspects of your fitness your endurance, your muscular endurance, your anaerobic capacity, your recovery, your strength, your hypertrophy. And in describing these tools to improve your fitness, it also provides an opportunity for each and all of us to step back from our existing fitness routine and ask whether or not it's really checking off all the boxes. That are necessary, as well as where we can be more economical with our time and our efforts in order to reach our specific goals related to exercise and performance. So, by the end of today's episode, you can be sure that you have at least one and as many as twelve tools that you can incorporate into your existing fitness routine, again without adding much additional time or effort that are sure to accelerate your progress.
Andrew Huberman: Now, another tool that's wonderfully effective, not just for your workouts, but for all areas of your life, is if you are going to bring a smartphone to your workouts to set some boundaries around what you're going to listen to and do with that smartphone during your workouts. I see people texting, I see people doing selfies, I see people having phone calls, I see people I presume listening to music or podcasts. Look, I am not the smartphone police, nor are you. And everyone has a right to use their smartphone in the way that they choose is best for them in order to distract themselves or focus themselves or enrich their life. Look, it's a free world, of course, more for some than for others, but you can do what you want with your smartphone. However, if your goal is to improve your fitness, one of the more powerful things you can do with your smartphone is to decide before you cross the line into your workout what you're going to listen to or do with that phone or not. So for me, I like to designate a playlist of music for that particular workout and then I just stick to that playlist.

Andrew Huberman: I might repeat songs that I like a lot or if someone talks to me while the music's playing, I might go back and restart a song if they distracted me, that sort of thing. Although I do my best to not get into too much social chitchat during workouts. But I'm friendly and it's nice when people come over and say hello. I sometimes work out with other people, in which case I don't use headphones, I don't use a smartphone. But setting a playlist or two, designating a podcast or two, designating an audiobook or two, whatever it is that you're going to listen to to really decide what that's going to be before you do your workout. The reason I say this is that I observe a lot of people and frankly, I've observed myself under conditions where I'm suddenly in a text communication or I'm bouncing between albums or between podcasts or between whatever it is on the phone. To the point where rest intervals aren't being controlled well.
Andrew Huberman: Well, it turns out if you look at the literature on creatine and athletic performance, and if you look at the literature on creatine and cognitive performance, because as some of you already know, breathing is a fuel, or the phosphocretine system is a fuel system for the brain as well. And if you look at the studies on creatine, they almost always gauge the amount of creatine to give an individual based on their body weight. So you don't have to get really specific about this. But if you weigh, say, 185 pounds to 250 pounds, you can get away with and probably should be taking 10 grams or so of creatine per day, which is what I do. Whereas if you weigh less than that, 5 grams or maybe even 3 grams is sufficient. Now, I discussed this with Dr. Andy Galpin during that series, and one of the things that I've started to do since the closure of that series is to take more creatine per day. So now I'm taking ten, sometimes even as much as 15 grams per day of breathing. Again, this is powdered creatine monohydrate.

Andrew Huberman: My stomach tolerates it very well, but frankly, I don't tend to get stomach aches or gastric distress from pretty much anything, unless it's some form of food poisoning, which is exceedingly rare for me. So. Some people out there find that creatine really disrupts their gut and they need to take it with food, or they really need to slowly increase the amount of creatine that they're taking each day. I find that I can put ten, even 15 grams of creatine into a whey protein shake or into some water with a little bit of lemon juice just to make it taste a little less chalky. Drink that. And I don't have any gastric distress from that. So you'll need to find what works for you. But the point here is, if you're going to take creatine, you don't just want to, quote, unquote, take creatine one scoop per day. You really want to adjust the amount of creatine that you're ingesting according to your body weight. And I would give you a very specific formula of x grams of creatine per kilogram or pound of body weight. But believe it or not, no such specific recommendation has ever been published in the scientific literature.

Andrew Huberman: At least I couldn't find it in a way that's consistent with all the other papers, meaning you see a lot of variation. So what I'm talking about here is if you weigh 185 pounds or so, okay, plus or minus five pounds, out to about 250 pounds, ten to 15 grams of breathing per day is probably more appropriate for you than is 5 grams, meaning it's going to be more effective for enhancing physical performance and perhaps again, perhaps even cognitive performance as well. And if you're somebody who weighs 180 pounds down to, say, 130 pounds, 5 grams of creatine per day is probably sufficient. The point here is, if you are taking creatine, again, not everyone has to take creatine. There's no law that says that you have to take creatine. Some people don't like it. I know some people fear it's going to make their hair fall out. We already talked about that in previous episodes and the lack of data to support that idea. But I realize some people steer away from creatine for whatever reason. But if you decide that taking creatine is right for you, adjust the total amount of creatine that you take according to your body weight.
Andrew Huberman: It's certainly not as intense as the workout that you just did. Maybe you were even feeling really calm from a nice long jog, or you had a particularly good workout that day, and you're feeling really happy. So you're enjoying the high, so to speak. Well, when you do three to five minutes of what's often called down regulation breathing after a workout, it allows you to recover and to induce the adaptation that you've been after, the one that you actually train for much more quickly. I can't tell you how many people I know who start to incorporate this into their workouts find that they recover far better from their workouts, which might seem a little bit surprising. Why would it be that just three to five minutes of some activity would enhance recovery to such a great degree? And that's because typically people don't bookend their workouts. They finish their workouts. And of course, they're not continuing to lift weights or run, but they move about their day and their life, even if it's preparing a meal in a way that the level of stress, and therefore stress hormones.

Andrew Huberman: Things like cortisol, adrenaline, things that, by the way, are excellent to elevate during a workout, things like inflammatory markers, which, by the way, are great to enhance during a workout that actually happens during a workout. You have a massive increase in inflammatory markers, which might seem bad, but all of those things are enhancing the adaptation that you're seeking. But as soon as those workouts end, you want to shift into recovery mode. And this three to five minutes of down regulation breathing is a terrific way to do that. There are a couple of different patterns of breathing that will work best, but all of them emphasize exhales. Okay, I want to repeat that. All of them emphasize exhales. So, for instance, you could just choose slow, deliberate breathing. How does that emphasize exhales? Well, ordinarily when we breathe, we inhale actively and we exhale passively. Whenever we deliberately breathe more slowly, we are actively exhaling. So active exhales really promote the calming response in brain and body.

Andrew Huberman: The other thing you could do, which many people are now doing, is to do a repeated round of physiological size. So the double inhale through the nose, long exhale through the mouth, but repeated for, say, three minutes. That's another version the other thing you could do is simply to notice your exhales and to emphasize your exhales, make them longer and more vigorous than your inhales. Now, you don't want to turn this into a breath work session where you're doing pranayama or kundalini breathing or something of that sort. The idea is to calm down. So anytime you're extending your exhales, you're actively exhaling. You're trying to slow your breathing down overall, you're going to shift yourself in the right direction. So rather than complicate this type of tool, the best thing you can do is just focus on those exhales, slow your breathing overall, use physiological size if you want, or simply sit in your vehicle or if you have to drive home while doing this extended exhale type of down regulation.

Andrew Huberman: Ideally, you would take a couple of minutes and just shift your whole system by not driving, closing your eyes, and just sitting in your car stationary. Of course, don't drive with your eyes closed or bike with your eyes closed. Just simply calm down, extend your exhales and shift from the workout to the recovery mode, which is where the progress is going to arrive.
Andrew Huberman: Okay, you could lean back against the wall a little bit harder if you wanted to gain some extra support and continue. But the idea here is that you're going to go not necessarily to muscular failure, but to the point where you can't continue to sit in that wall sit position. You could also simply do this as an air squat down to the bottom position where you're comfortable, and then you don't want to rest down there. Meaning you want to maintain some tension in your quadriceps and other muscles of your lower body so that you're actively trying to support yourself in the seated position, but without a seat below you. That can be done again, while on a speaker phone conversation that can be done at random throughout the day. You can just decide, okay, I'm going to do a wall sit now, and I'm going to time myself, I'm going to see how long I can do this for. Or you could decide to do a plank. I've done this while on a phone call. Sorry if it was you that I was talking to, but I put the phone on speaker and just gotten into a plank position, and then I'll just have the conversation in the plank position.

Andrew Huberman: I don't fight to maintain that plank position past the point where I could continue to have a conversation. So, again, this is a type of exercise that one is trying to incorporate into their daily routine. If you wanted to dedicate a specific amount of time just to doing these exercise snacks, you could. But it's far more reasonable to assume that people will incorporate these into their daily routine more regularly. If you can incorporate it truly into the other aspects. Of your routine, like work. You do this while watching TV or listening to a podcast. One form of muscular endurance exercise snack that's really terrific and is a bit of a challenge that's fun is to just simply see how many pushups you can do. And we talked about proper pushup form during the episode series with Dr. Andy Galpin. But here what we're talking about is chest all the way to the ground. So it touches the ground, then pushing up till your arms are completely straight, that's one push up and then continuing in piston like fashion, meaning you're not pausing at the top and taking a bunch of breaths.

Andrew Huberman: You're not going to a plank position, in other words, but continuing to do as many push ups as you can to see whether or not you can enhance that number over time. And in any case, just to simply get your body working to engage the muscles of your chest, your shoulders, your triceps and your core, et cetera, and to do that every once in a while. So instead of needing somebody to say drop and give me 20, just see whether or not at some point, any point throughout the day, you can get into a push up position, do your maximum number of pushups, and then just mentally note that number to yourself. Again, these exercise snacks serve multiple roles. They're designed to get you moving, to get your heart rate going, to maintain or enhance your fitness in other domains of fitness. And this is very important to not take too much time out of your schedule.

Andrew Huberman: In fact, like zone two cardio, right, being the type of movement that you're just going to do a lot throughout the week, carrying groceries, et cetera. As we discussed earlier, these exercise snacks are designed to be incorporated into your daily life. And I must say that having started doing these after recording the series with Dr. Andy Galpin, I've noticed two things. First of all, including these exercise snacks at least once a week and more like three to five times a week for me. So that's one exercise snack done three to five times per week has definitely correlated with improvements in my fitness in other domains of fitness strength, hypertrophy, long distance endurance, et cetera. Now, I've changed a number of other things as well as a consequence of that series with Dr. Andy Gallup. And so I can't say for sure that it's the exercise snacks per se that are causing all those positive shifts.

Andrew Huberman: I have to imagine that it's not just the exercise snacks, but they've become an important part of my routine. And that relates to the second point, which is that the exercise snacks are designed to be fun and easy and so I really enjoy doing them so much so that if I don't do one for a couple of days, I start to crave them a little bit, kind of like the other kind of snack.
Andrew Huberman: Note caption to this episode, I do want to point out that you don't just jump right into heavy sets of three to five repetitions. You need to warm up adequately. For some people that warm up will be higher repetition sets, so say ten to twelve repetitions with just the empty bar or a lightweight, and then adding a little bit of weight and doing eight repetitions and maybe six repetitions. And then your work sets, as they're called, of three to five repetitions. Or perhaps you're like me and you prefer to do low repetition warm ups. So this was also something that I discussed with Dr. Andy Galpin, and that for me has made a tremendous positive impact on all my resistance training, regardless of whether or not it is low repetition or higher repetition. And that's to do a brief warm up set that is somewhere in the range of six to eight repetitions, very light, just to get familiar with the movement.

Andrew Huberman: Then to do a second warm up set that includes some load on the bar or the free weight or the machine, and then a second warm up set. Again, this could be free weights or machines that incorporates a bit more load but still keeps the repetitions low. So in the four to six repetition range, and then maybe especially if it's at the beginning of the workout and my core body temperature isn't elevated yet, I'll do a third warm up. But that third warm up, which of course is going to be progressively a little bit heavier than the first or second warm up, is still going to fall within the low repetition range. So just two to four repetitions for me, including a few more warm up sets with progressively heavier weight on each warm up, but still keeping the total repetition count low. So somewhere in the range of two to six repetitions has been very beneficial for improving my work output during the so called work sets, regardless of whether or not I'm training in the three to five repetition range, or whether or not I'm training in the six to 15 repetition range.

Andrew Huberman: I know for some people this might be kind of surprising. How is it that my work sets are actually higher repetition than my warm up sets? Or put differently, how and why is it that my warm up sets are lower repetition than my work sets? And that's because I fall into this category of people that tends to fatigue pretty quickly when doing resistance training. So for me, keeping the repetition count on any individual warm up set pretty low has allowed me to really improve my strength output and really improve my strength and hypertrophy training when I shift to the so called work sets.
Andrew Huberman: Maybe even leg extensions and leg curls, which are isolation exercises, of course, to really restrict oneself to those three to five repetition ranges that take you to failure or near failure. I listed off the benefits of doing that that I experienced, and I'm confident that you will also experience a lot of benefits. So just to remind you what some of those benefits are, you get stronger, which feels great, that occurs within your weight workouts, but it also carries over to your endurance training sessions. I also noticed that when we're returning to higher repetitions for resistance training so after twelve weeks shifting away from three to five repetition ranges and going back to training in the six to ten repetition ranges mainly occasionally up to twelve or 15, but really mainly restricting to six to ten repetitions that you can move much heavier weights in good form and thereby induce more hypertrophy while still also continuing to gain some strength. And another benefit was again reduced soreness compared to when training with higher repetition ranges and more mental freshness.

Andrew Huberman: I guess the only way to describe it when training in those lower repetition ranges. I don't know about you, but when I finish a really hard, hour long resistance training session done in the six to twelve repetition range, there's a certain type of mental fatigue that even if I eat properly afterwards, even if I hydrate properly, that it tends to SAP a bit of my mental energy later in the day. But that the training at the three to five repetition range did just the opposite. It actually enhanced my focus and my cognition, my overall levels of physical energy, which is great because it allows you to do all the other things that we're required to do throughout the day. And by the way, it'll also allow you to get more of that zone two cardio. So if you want more details on the three by five protocol, again that's timestamped in the relevant episode on Strength, Strength, Strength and Hypertrophyenhancing tools with Dr. Andy Galpin, I'll also provide a link to that specific timestamp in the show.
Andrew Huberman: I actually felt much stronger during my cardiovascular training as I got much stronger moving these heavier weight loads for low repetition sets. And then the third specific benefit that I noticed is that when training heavy for three to five repetitions per set, I didn't get sore. And this, to me, was an incredible benefit. Because typically when I train in the six repetition to 15 repetition range and I take those sets to failure or near failure, I do experience some soreness the next day. Ordinarily that soreness isn't so intense that it prevents me from doing any of the other sorts of workouts that I do. And for those of you that have visited that foundational fitness program protocol, you know that I hit each major and minor muscle group once per week directly as well as once per week indirectly. That's the overall structure of that program in order to allow sufficient recovery between those resistance training workouts to be able to make continual progress.

Andrew Huberman: Now, by training in this three to five repetition range that Dr. Andy Galpin suggested, I was able to improve my strength, improve my cardiovascular output, reduce soreness, I also just felt better overall. I had a lot more energy after those workouts than I typically do after my resistance training sessions. When I use higher repetition ranges, there are just a number of different things that made me feel, wow, this is really a powerful protocol. And of course, moving heavier weights in the gym feels good too. It feels good to get stronger. At least there's a positive feedback loop there for me and I think for most people. And I should also mention that for those of you that are averse to doing heavier resistance training in this three to five repetition range because you fear that it will make you too big or too bulky, training in the low repetition ranges is actually more geared towards increasing strength and is shifting away somewhat from increasing hypertrophy or muscle size. So that's a great benefit for those of you that want to be strong and also want to maintain cardiovascular fitness, but you don't want to add muscular size. And of course, for all of you that want to add muscular size, it's well established that increasing your strength will allow you then to return to patterns of hypertrophy training that will allow you to use heavier weights and therefore induce greater hypertrophy. So there are so many reasons to incorporate these strength training protocols. So the way that Dr. Andy Galpin suggested one do it, and was the way that I did it, is to use this three by five protocol.
Andrew Huberman: Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and sciencerelated tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing you don't. That means plenty of salt, sodium, magnesium, and potassium the electrolytes, but no sugar. Having adequate electrolytes is absolutely critical to cellular function, in particular the function of neurons. In order for your neurons to function properly, you need electrolytes in your system and you need to be well hydrated. There's a lot of research to support the fact that if you are even mildly dehydrated that your cognition suffers, your physical performance suffers, and your sleep can also suffer. So getting adequate electrolytes and hydration is key, and Element allows you to do that.

Andrew Huberman: I typically mix Element into 16 to 32oz of water and drink that first thing in the morning. I'll also drink another one during exercise and sometimes another one after exercise as well, especially if I've been sweating a lot or it's a particularly hot day. If you'd like to try Element, you can go to Drinkeelement.com Huberman, and that's spelled Lmnt.com Huberman, and you can claim a free sample pack with your purchase. Again, that's drinkeelement Lmnt.com Huberman to claim a free sample pack. Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are of the absolute highest quality. I've talked many times before on this podcast about the fact that sleep is the foundation of mental health, physical health, and performance. And I say that because when we are not sleeping well or enough, all of those things suffer. Conversely, when we are sleeping well and we're sleeping enough, all of those things improve.

Andrew Huberman: One of the key elements to getting a great night's sleep is to have the proper mattress. Helix Mattresses are different because they are customized to your unique sleep needs. So if you go to their website and take a brief two minute quiz, they will match you to a mattress that's ideal for your sleep needs. The quiz asks questions such as do you sleep on your back? Your side of your stomach? Perhaps you don't know that's fitness tools, or do you tend to run hot or cold during the night? Things of that sort that allow them to match you to a mattress that will give you the best possible night's sleep? I've started sleeping on a Helix mattress a few years ago, and it has vastly improved my sleep. If you're interested in upgrading your mattress, you can go to Helix Sleep Huberman to take that two minute sleep quiz, and they'll match you to a customized mattress. You can also get up to $350 off any mattress order and two free pillows. Again, if you're interested, you can go to Helix Sleep Huberman for up to $350 off and two free pillows.
Andrew Huberman: Now, the final tool that I want to review for improving your fitness comes from the category of nutrition. I've done lots of episodes about nutrition already on this podcast. We've done episodes about intermittent fasting. I did a long interview episode with Dr. Lane Norton where we discussed all the ins and outs of nutrition as it relates to fat loss, muscle gain, fitness in general, lifestyle in general. So check out that episode where you will learn his philosophy on nutrition, which, frankly, is the one that I largely subscribe to. It, of course, obeys the laws of thermodynamics calories in, calories out being fundamentally important, but also gets into all sorts of details about which sources of protein are most effective, and bioavailable, how much protein you can incorporate into your muscles after training, et cetera. All of that is included in that episode. With that said, the series on exercise with Dr. Andy Galpin also included an episode on nutrition. And while having the discussion for that episode and then listening to that episode again, I realized that while certainly I've gotten a number of things right about my nutrition across the years, there are a few areas where I could probably do better without much effort in ways that could really enhance my fitness. And the thing that I'm referring to is that for me, my first meal of the day lands somewhere around 11:00 a.m., maybe twelve noon. Sometimes I'll eat an earlier breakfast, but most typically I hydrate and caffeinate and train in the morning. And then I eat sometime around eleven or twelve. And then I eat my last meal of the day sometime around 830 or nine. And as some of you already know, I tend to organize my meals such that meals during the early part of the day tend to lean more toward protein and fibrous carbohydrates. So things like meat and salad, or chicken and salad, fish and salad, and maybe a little bit of starch. And the meals that I eat later in the day tend to be more starch focused and more vegetable focused. So things like pasta, rice, et cetera, later in the day because it helps me sleep. And the architecture of all that is really about energy and focus, I find I can focus a bit better and I have more energy throughout the day when I have my first meal at around eleven or twelve and I keep the total amount of carbohydrates that I ingest during the day moderate.
Peter Attia: Actually, no, I correct that both Fsh and LH will go down on a.

Andrew Huberman: High enough dose just as a mention. And here I'm not making recommendations, but one supplement I've talked a lot about publicly is Fidojia Agrestis, which is this weird Nigerian shrub.

Peter Attia: This on Tim's podcast.

Andrew Huberman: On tim's podcast and Joe's podcast. And, you know, there was a bit of a backlash because it does turn out that at high doses in rodent studies, it can cause some toxicity to the testes, but at lower doses, it does seem to increase luteinizing hormone. And after talking about this, a number of people went out there, did pre and post blood work, and the consistent effect seems to be an increase in luteinizing hormone. There's a noticeable effect on testicular size and volume. So a lot of people take this and be like, oh, their balls are getting bigger, and so they get all excited that something good is happening. But we don't know the long term safety and efficacy of something like fidojia, whether or not it needs to be cycled.

Peter Attia: This is why I'm also very leery of the supplements in this space, because at least when we're using Hcg or testosterone, we have so many years of data, you have to remember how many women are using this stuff for reproductive medicine. So I think the FDA has a lot of faults. I think I have an entire podcast devoted to the corruption of the FDA and all of the mistakes that have been made with respect to their oversight in especially generic drugs. But it's way more regulated than the wild, wild west of nutty supplement land.

Andrew Huberman: Absolutely. I think that the reason for talking about things like Tongad and fidojia was to provide some intermediate discussion between doing all the correct things, but no supplementation or hormone therapy and then going straight to hormone therapy. It's sort of like the leap from I can't focus very well to Ritalin without a real diagnosis of ADHD, to, oh, well, maybe some things like alpha GPC, low doses of nicotine. Right.

Peter Attia: But.

Andrew Huberman: I agree entirely. I mean, the sourcing is important. The dosages are worked out empirically on an individual basis, and there aren't randomized control trials.

Peter Attia: There just aren't yeah. Have kind of like a seven. This is another Peter principle, right? So I got a lot of patients that come into the practice, and during our intake, we go through, what drugs and supplements are you taking right now? And a lot of people come in, I'm not taking anything. Peter, you're in charge now. Tell me what you think. And then you get a lot of people that come in and they're like, we're going to need an extra few pages for this part of the documentation.
Peter Attia: Ansel Keys acknowledged this in the 1960s. Dietary cholesterol plays no role in serum cholesterol. Again, it took the American Heart Association another 60 years to figure that out. But even now, they acknowledge that dietary cholesterol has no bearing.

Andrew Huberman: So why is it that it's pretty easy to find studies, or at least people who are highly credentialed from good institutions claiming that eating saturated fat saturated fat is different. Saturated fat and red meat, things that are rich in cholesterol, to be more specific, is bad for us in terms of eventual LDL.

Peter Attia: So this is two different things. So saturated fat consumption in many people will raise LDL cholesterol. So it's important to differentiate between the what is saturated fat? So saturated fat, of course, is a fatty acid, just so people understand. Totally different molecule from cholesterol. Cholesterol is this very complicated ring structure, multiple rings stuck together, SFA. Saturated fat is just a long chain fatty acid that is fully saturated, meaning it has no double bonds and it can exist in isolation. It can exist in a triglyceride, tricoglyceride or a phospholipid or all sorts of things like that. So when we eat foods that contain fat, basically there are three distinctions for that fat. Is it saturated? Is it monounsaturated, one double bond? Or is it polyunsaturated two or more double bonds? The observation that eating saturated fat raises cholesterol is generally correct. But again, now it makes because if we're going to start talking about LDL, we have to explain what LDL is.

Peter Attia: This is another one of those things that's just so grossly misunderstood that it makes having discussions about this very complicated. Let's go back to the cholesterol problem. So every cell in our body makes cholesterol. And almost without exception, they make enough. There are a handful of times, however, when a cell needs to borrow cholesterol from another cell. Okay, so how would you do this? Right, so if you're playing God for a minute and you want to design a system, you have to be able to transport cholesterol from one cell to another. The most logical place you would transport this is through the circulation. And the problem with circulation is it's water. Plasma is water. So now you have this problem, which is I want to transport cargo that is hydrophobic in a hydrophilic medium. Can't do it. So if you think about all the things that we transport in our blood sodium, electrolytes, glucose, things like that, they're water soluble. It's easy.
Peter Attia: It's got to be able to kind of move in this way to mesh with other cells. It also has to accommodate having porous structures that traverse its membrane to allow ions and things like that to go across. And it's cholesterol that gives the fluidity to that membrane. It's also, as you're alluding to the backbone of some of the most important hormones in our body. Estrogen, progesterone, testosterone, cortisol. So we have this thing super important. Okay, then let's talk about can you get cholesterol in your diet? Yes, you can eat foods that are rich in cholesterol. What was known in 1960, but somehow escaped everybody's imagination until finally the American Heart Association acknowledged this a few years ago, is that the cholesterol you eat does not really make it into your body. And the reason for that is it's a sterified. And not to get too nerdy, but I really think it's important people understand how this thing works. So we have cells in our gut and enterocytes.

Peter Attia: They're the endothelial cells of our gut. Each one of them has basically two transporters on them. So the first is called the neiman pick C, one like one transporter. The second is called the ATP binding cassette G. Okay, the neiman pick C, one like one transporter will bring in any sterol cholesterol, zoo, sterol, phytosterol, any sterol that fits through the door will come in. Virtually all of that is the cholesterol we produce that gets taken back to the liver, that the liver packages in bile and secretes. So that's what AIDS in our digestion, which is another thing I should have mentioned earlier. In addition to using cholesterol for cell membranes and hormones, we wouldn't be able to digest our food without cholesterol because it's what makes up the bile salts. So our own cholesterol is basically recirculated in a pool throughout our body. And this is the way it gets back into the body. It's through this nemen pixie one like one transporter.

Peter Attia: When it gets in there, the body this is the checkpoint of regulation. This is where the body says, do you have enough cholesterol in the body? Yes or no? If yes, I will let that cholesterol make its way into the circulation so it'll go off the basilateral side of the cell, not the luminal side, into the body. Alternatively, the body says, you know what? We have enough cholesterol. I'm going to let you poop this out. And now the ATP binding cassette will shoot it out. It'll go back into the luminal side and away it goes. So all of the cholesterol in our body is not asterified, meaning it doesn't have that big bulky side chain attached to it. The cholesterol you eat is asterified, and an asteroid cholesterol molecule simply can't physically pass through that nemen pixie one like, one transporter. Now, we probably manage to de esterify ten to 15% of our dietary cholesterol. So in other words, there are small amounts of dietary cholesterol that do make their way into our circulation, but it represents a small fraction of our total body's pool of cholesterol. Again, this was known even by Ansel Keys, the guy who turned fat into the biggest boogeyman of all time.
Andrew Huberman: There is tremendous debate about whether or not dietary cholesterol directly relates to or does not relate to serum cholesterol, LDL and HDL. Here's my answer. Well, let me put it this way. There are people that argue I'm certainly not arguing there are people that argue that if one eats a ton of saturated fat that LDL goes up and down.

Peter Attia: Okay, but that's not dietary cholesterol per se.

Andrew Huberman: No, not dietary cholesterol per se. And then there are people that argue that any increase in saturated fat intake is going to be bad, that you already synthesize enough cholesterol for hormone production, et cetera. I'd like to talk about this in terms of how one should read their charts. My LDL is in what I'm told is healthy range. My HDL is in what I'm told is healthspan range. I do try and not overeat things like butter, cheese, and red meat, but I do eat some of those things and I feel pretty good. But most people are operating under the assumption that eating saturated fat is bad and you only do it insofar as you want to taste it. And then, of course, there's a small group of people that love to eat organs and meats and really pack cholesterol and would argue that doesn't matter if your LDL is 870, it's not going to impact your health. What's the reality around LDL, HDL, dietary cholesterol, saturated fat, at least in your view?

Peter Attia: So first, let's differentiate between cholesterol and fat just for the listener, because we use them. I don't want to make sure people understand. So cholesterol is a really complicated molecule. So it's a ringed molecule. God, I used to know exactly what its structure was, but it could have 36 carbons, for all I remember. It is a lipid. So it is a hydrophobic molecule that is synthesized by every cell in the human body. It is so important that without it, if you look at sort of genetic conditions that impair cholesterol synthesis, depending on their severity, they can be fatal in utero. So, in other words, anything that really interferes with our ability to produce cholesterol is a threat to us as a species. And the reason for that is cholesterol makes up the cell membrane of every cell in our body. So, as you know, but maybe the listeners don't. Even though a cell is a spherical thing, it has to be fluid, right? It's not just a rigid sphere like a blow up ball, right?
Andrew Huberman: And the reason is, ever since going on podcasts and talking about this stuff and talking about it on this podcast, people will send me their numbers, they'll send me their charts, and then they'll send photos of themselves. And I can tell you, while I'm not a clinician and I haven't done fancy statistics on it, there is very little correlation between someone's absolute testosterone and how they appear. I mean, some of these guys look really lean, really strong, and they'll say, oh, total testosterone is 554 80. Right? And then other people testosterone is 860. But you'd look at them and you think, oh, they kind of gave kind of a doughy look to them. And so it's got to be this free testosterone thing. Plus estrogen, et, Peter training and nutrition too.

Peter Attia: Right. For all this talk about testosterone, which I enjoy talking about, and I enjoy talking about the data on long term health consequences of testosterone because it's another controversial topic, I also think people kind of overstate its importance. I agree. And I think there's a group of people who think, if I could just fix my testosterone, everything will be better and it's sort of like no, actually, that's not true at all. Really, the only purpose in my mind of fixing testosterone is to give you the capacity to work harder. It's really going to help you recover more from your workouts. This should just give you a greater ability to experience muscle protein synthesis. So if I just give you a bunch of testosterone and you sit on the couch and your nutrition doesn't change and you're not exercising anymore, you're not going to experience any benefits of this thing? I mean, my testosterone level has fluctuated quite a bit throughout my life. And when I think about as an adult, not sort of including when I was sort of a fanatical teenager, but as an adult, when was I at my absolute most insane physique?

Peter Attia: Like, my best performance on a Dexa scan would have been 30. I was 38 years old by Dexa. I was 7%. Body fat, my fat free mass index was like 23.223.3 kg/meter squared. I mean, I was huge, strong and totally ripped. My testosterone was in the toilet. I was over training like crazy. I was exercise probably 26 hours a week, killing it in the gym, swimming like a banshee, cycling like my life depended on it. Grossly overtrained, low t, but physically looked like twice the guy I am today. Today my tea is probably twice as high as it was then. Now, you could say, Well, Peter, what if you took tea back then? How much better could you have been? Sure, but but again, I think the take home is just giving somebody tea doesn't do much of anything. It probably helps on the insulin resistance front without any other thing. But to me that's a waste that's squandering the gift that it is giving you, which is the ability to do more work and capture the benefit of it via muscle protein synthesis.

Andrew Huberman: I agree. And I think that the psychological effect of testosterone, whether or not it's exogenous or endogenous, is it makes effort feel good at some level, it really seems to do that. And Sepulski tells me the main reason, or mechanistically, the main reason that it can do that is by adjusting levels of activity in the amygdala.

Peter Attia: Interesting.

Andrew Huberman: And so there's some interesting imaging there. I'd love to chat more about the cholesterol pathway and I know this is a huge landscape as well, but I think we're doing a good job of diving in deep, but not getting stuck in the underlying currents at all.
Peter Attia: Well, again, it depends if, when we say TRT, if you're in your twenty s and there's no other way, I would hope you would be steered toward Hcg to at least preserve testicular function. Now, again, we don't actually know if Peter being on Hcg for ten years, your pituitary will still work.

Andrew Huberman: You won't be able to make your own luteinizing.

Peter Attia: Exactly. So it might be the case that you're going to need something upstream of that, like Clomid to kickstart it. But again, I don't want anybody who's listening to this, who's using Clomid for fertility to think that there's anything wrong with it. My concern over this became like, if you're going to be on this for ten years. Is it problematic? Not if you're using this for a course of IVF or something like that. So, again, if we felt that someone's pituitary was not working, I would be happy to put three months of clomid on them to kind of try to see if we could blast it back.

Andrew Huberman: Do you have men cycle on and off testosterone at these low dosages? Are they taking a month vacation from it every month?

Peter Attia: Yeah, it totally depends. I was talking to a patient yesterday where we're going to do we just decided to change a cycle eight weeks on, then eight weeks on hcg. Eight weeks on, then eight weeks on hcg. So that's going to be a cycle that maintains his testosterone level, but fluctuates between endogenous exogenous, endogenous exogenous. Sometimes we'll just do testosterone on, off, on, off, and there it's like, how much can he replenish naturally? But understanding his T will dip during.

Andrew Huberman: Those off cycles, seems to me there's a tremendous incentive for somebody to develop a molecule that can directly target Shbg peptides, oxandrolone Anivar. Right. If you one could just drop SHPG just the tiniest bit, it seems like one could adjust the free T in a way that would be great. I don't know why that molecule is so hard to target, but somebody ought to do it. The chemistry can't be that hard.

Peter Attia: I talked with Patrick Arnold about this many years ago. I wish I could remember what his idea. He had a comment about this that at the time made sense, and I don't remember what it was because I had that thought too, like, man, especially for that subset of guys who have normal testosterone, but they're just overbinding it.

Andrew Huberman: I'm really glad that you brought up this issue of total testosterone versus free tea.
Peter Attia: Yeah, we just say, Why risk it? Like, we'd rather use Hcg just on its own. Yeah, just wait. Just wait till you're done reproducing bank sperm. Wait till you're done reproducing before we go to testosterone.

Andrew Huberman: What are some of the benefits and what are some of the cautionary notes with appropriate TRT meaning of the kind of contour that we're talking about here? A lower dose with the yes or no low estrogen control, what generally people report, how do they feel, what does it allow them to do that they couldn't do or feel before? And then in terms of what are the markers to look for, is it LDL, blood pressure, water retention, acne, those kinds of things? Are there some other things?

Peter Attia: It depends on the doses.

Andrew Huberman: Right.

Peter Attia: I mean, again, we're using these in really low doses. So it's pretty rare that we'd have a patient on more than 100 milligrams a week of testosterone. I think, for comparison, like a bodybuilder could easily take 500 to 1000 during a high growth phase.

Andrew Huberman: I know some of these guys, they go ballistic or they're doing moderate levels of testosterone sibinate, but they're also taking Dianabolicandrolone Sarms and a bunch of other things. I mean, their stacks are kind of ridiculous. I mean, no disrespect to that sport, but people like crazy in that sport.

Peter Attia: Right now, outside of physiology.

Andrew Huberman: Yeah, and I think for 99% of people listening, they hear bodybuilder and they just go like, why would somebody do that anyway?

Peter Attia: Right? I think that's the typical the point is a lot of but we owe those guys a great deal of gratitude because they've shown us the boundaries, including the women. That's right. Those bodybuilders have taught us a lot about what happens. And so, yeah, the bloating, the water retention, acne, hair loss, hair growth, all of those things, we understand. The truth of it is we just don't see those things in our patients.

Andrew Huberman: But 100 milligrams per week is a very low output.

Peter Attia: But it's a physiologic dose. The reality of it is it's enough for most people. I mean, probably the highest we've ever had to go is maybe 70 twice a week.

Andrew Huberman: What's the youngest patient you've ever had to put on TRT?

Peter Attia: Actual testosterone? Probably. I ask you a question. I'm thinking about maybe 40.

Andrew Huberman: I think that's great for people to hear because I know that a lot of guys in their 20s are thinking TRT is the way to go. And I would argue, unless you're doing everything else right and you're still hypogonadal and you're really struggling, put that time off because also the fertility issue you want to delay.
Andrew Huberman: Now I understand why you don't prescribe Clomafine because of this potential Dysmor link. What about testosterone therapy? So less frequent, lower doses less, or no estrogen inhibition or aromatase inhibition.

Peter Attia: We're only using an aromatase blocker, and we use aromatix when we do it's just to get that estradiol into the range we want. I like to see it between 30 and 50. That's the sweet spot. And I don't know, I would say like a third, maybe not even a third. I'd say probably 20% of men require a micro dose of nastrozol to get into that range. Most do not. And I'd rather err on the side of being a little high than a little low. So I never really want to be below 25. Sometimes it's just below 25 and it is. It is what it is. That's fine, but but if we're suppressing it to below 25, I never want to be in that zone. And then yes. So TRT is ultimately giving testosterone. Cipionate is usually what we use injectable.

Andrew Huberman: So it's supposed to creamer Pellet.

Peter Attia: Correct. I used to use Pellets with women for some who were really adamant about the convenience of it, but for a bunch of reasons, I'm mostly not doing that. And I've never been a fan of Pellets.

Andrew Huberman: In men, you can't control the dosages once it's in.

Peter Attia: Right, I know the dose. Yeah, that's obviously a problem. But I don't think there's a big difference between putting a Pellet into a man and a woman. So when you're putting an estrogen Pellet into a woman, it's that big. When you're putting enough Pellets into a man for six months of testosterone, it's two sums of Pellets that are longer than my finger. So you're putting, like a V where.

Andrew Huberman: Are you putting this?

Peter Attia: You're putting it into the gluteal fat. So it's just a more morbid procedure. And I don't think it's necessary. I think if you know how to manage it through sort of the injections yeah. Well, especially now, if you're doing we're having them do sub Q injections anyway, so it's not im. They're using five eight inch to a one inch 25 gauge needle, which is about the smallest needle you can push the oil through once to twice a week, depending on and by the way, if they're real needle phobes, we use Ziosted, which is a preloaded pen.

Andrew Huberman: And are you having all men take Hcg to maintain fertility and testosterone? Got it.

Peter Attia: And by the way, we do not like to use TRT in men who we don't like to use testosterone, specifically in men who still want to maintain fertility. We just steer them away from that.

Andrew Huberman: Because total sperm count goes down.
Andrew Huberman: People who travel with a suitcase that you can hear as they walk through the airport from all the pills.

Peter Attia: So I give these patients a little homework exercise, which is you have to answer these seven questions for every supplement you take. And here's the spreadsheet, and let's talk about it. And it basically just runs through it's, basically walking you through the logic of why do you take this molecule? And I think for many people, when they do that, it's very sobering, right? A lot of them will come back and be like, you know what? I don't think I can come up with any reason along this really rigorous line of thinking as to why I'm taking 80% of this stuff.

Andrew Huberman: Well, I know people, and actually, we know some of the same people who are fanatic about, like, red light, red light on the testes, sunning their testes, putting ice packs on their testes. It's kind of all over the place. The number of things that people are trying and doing in order to increase testosterone output from their testes is pretty remarkable. And that said, among some of the women I know, the number of things that they're doing to try and promote longevity and fertility, and in particular skin health, hair health, and nail health is also kind of outrageous. Everything from collagen to red light therapies, which may actually have some efficacy in certain cases. But as an interesting there's a hunger there, right?

Peter Attia: Oh, for sure. One of the things that I hope gets a lot more attention is the use of rapamycin for preserving ovarian health. So the animal literature on this is pretty impressive, right? So in mouse models, rapamycin will preserve ovarian life. It makes sense, right? I mean, it totally makes sense why the most potent geoprotective molecule we have would also preserve and extend ovarian life, at least in mice. So I'd love to see the clinical trials done in women to test this hypothesis.

Andrew Huberman: I definitely want to come back to this because that's a key thing. I know that a lot of people are interested in female fertility out there, including their male partners.
Peter Attia: They just move back and forth in our blood with no chaperone. But when you want to move cholesterol, you have to package it in something that's hydrophilic. That something is called a lipoprotein. So we have these spherical molecules that are lipid on the inside, protein on the outside, apolipoprotein B. Inside. They contain cholesterol and triglycerides. So now you've got the spherical thing, triglyceride cholesterol on the inside. And it's chaperoned by a hydrophilic molecule that allows it to move through our circulation. And apolipoprotein b exist in different densities. So if you run these out on a gel electrophoresis plate, you'll identify different densities. The density is a function of how much protein and how much lipid is in it. So the highest density of this is called a high density lipoprotein. And the lowest density of this is called a very low density lipoprotein, a LDL. And then next to that you have an LDL, a low density Apolipoprotein B. Then next to that you have an ideal.

Peter Attia: An intermediate density apolipoprotein B actually goes LDL ID LDL. But anyway, so when people say my LDL is high or my LDL is 100, what are they saying? They're saying the cholesterol concentration of my LDL particles is 100 milligrams per deciliter. So the total cholesterol concentration you have in your circulation is that number that says total cholesterol. So if someone's blood panel says my total cholesterol is 200, it means that if you take all the lipoproteins in their circulation, bust them open and measure the cholesterol content, it's 200 milligrams per deciliter. And for all intents and purposes, because the IDLs are so short lived, that's basically the sum of your LDL cholesterol, your VLDL cholesterol and your HDL cholesterol. Those three things sum to your total cholesterol.

Andrew Huberman: What about LDL little A that you mentioned earlier?

Peter Attia: LP Little A is yeah, he's another actor. He is a special type of LDL that, again, in sort of ten to 20% of the population is a really bad actor. So that's an LDL that has another apolipoprotein on it called apolipoprotein Little A.

Andrew Huberman: Got it.

Peter Attia: The other thing I'll just say on this, because earlier I mentioned apob, there are two broad families of lipoproteins. There are those that are wrapped in APO B's and those that are wrapped in apoas. The apoa family is the HDL family, the apob family is the VLDL idl LDL family.
Peter Attia: In fact, maybe it wasn't known. I suspect it is inhibiting the enzyme, which I think is called Delta 24 desaturates, that turns Desmol into cholesterol. Makes sense. If you inhibit that enzyme, you're going to see a rise in Desmondrol. This wouldn't have been a concern to me if not for the fact that Tom Dayspring, who's one of the physicians we work with, who's one of the world's experts in Lipids, pointed out a very obscure story, which was that the very first drug ever approved to treat cardiovascular disease, at least to treat hypercholesterolemia, was a drug that attacked the same enzyme. So this was in the early 1960s, I believe, maybe the mid sixty s, this drug was approved and it lowered cholesterol and it was approved on the basis of lowering cholesterol. Now today, no drug for ASCVD is approved on the basis of it lowering cholesterol. That's not a high enough bar. You have to reduce events actually have to show that you're preventing heart attacks and death. But at that time it was like, hey, it lowers cholesterol, it's got to be good.

Peter Attia: Well, in the late 60s it was pulled from the market because events were going up. So cholesterol was coming down, events were going up. How could that be? We don't know. What we are suspecting is that Desmondrol, which is still a sterile, was potentially more damaging and created more oxidative stress in the endothelium in the sub endothelial space than cholesterol.

Andrew Huberman: I see.

Peter Attia: Which would at least suggest to us, and again, we're taking a lot of leaps here, that maybe having high Desmol, very high Desmond is not a good thing. And so once we kind of pieced all that together a few years ago we were like, yeah, we're just not going to prescribe clomid anymore. And we then switched to Hcg, which we used to use sometimes instead of clomid, but it's more cumbersome to work with. It needs to be refrigerated. It's a much more fragile molecule.

Andrew Huberman: Yeah, I think we talked about this once. It's almost like if you accidentally knock over the little bottle, it's basically gone bad. Travel with it is very travel with it.

Peter Attia: It's a needle. It's an injection sub queue. So easy to administer it's not im or anything like that, but it's just more of a hassle factor. But that said, it has the benefit that Clomid does, which is it preserves testicular function, it preserves testicular volume. So bodybuilders will often use this in their post cycle therapy as a way to kind of recover function. And we would just use it now as ongoing therapy for a guy who still has testicular reserve.

Andrew Huberman: So, on its own, no testosterone, no aromatase inhibitor, nothing. Just a way to crank out a bit more testosterone from the testes.

Peter Attia: Maybe some additional Hcg is a different model. Hcg is just an analog of luteinizing hormone. So it's basically like giving them luteinizing hormone.

Andrew Huberman: So it's going to crush endogenous luteinizing hormone levels. Right?

Peter Attia: Because of that, actually, yeah. You don't really see much of an impact on LH, but you do see endogenous testosterone production go down.
Peter Attia: Most of our patients do not take aromatase inhibitors. It's not needed. It's really only the high aromatizers that need it. When we'll talk about testosterone, we'll talk about dosing there because I agree, the more frequently you can take it, the better. And frankly, you don't need to go more frequently than twice a week because it's so slow. Yeah, the half life of the drug is I think it's about three and a half days. Is the plasma half life or something like that? It could be off a little bit, but twice week dosing is really nice. So if you go to a testosterone clinic that's giving you 200 every two weeks, 50 twice a week is the same total dose, which, by the way, is a physiologic dose, that's not going to give somebody any of the side effects you would see. You're not going to get acne with that. You're not going to get gynecomastia. You're not going to get anything. The only real side effect you get from that is you will get testicular atrophy that is enough to suppress yeah.

Andrew Huberman: To maintain fertility. What do you typically do for well.

Peter Attia: So I'll finish the story on Clomid because we currently do not use Clomid. And that's due to a really interesting observation that we made that I don't think has been reported in the literature yet, which is that clomid was increasing levels of a steroid that we also happen to measure called desmorol.

Andrew Huberman: I'm not familiar with that.

Peter Attia: So in the way that cholesterol is made, it's made by there's two pathways that make cholesterol. So it starts with two carbon subunits like acetylCoA, and it kind of marches down a pathway. bifurcates and cholesterol is the finished product of both. But in one of those pathways, the molecule right before cholesterol is called Desmorol. In the other pathway, it's called testosterone. So we constantly measure testosterone and Desmorol because we want to know how much cholesterol is being synthesized in the body, not just what your cholesterol is. We want to know how much cholesterol you reabsorb. And those markers are really important to us when we're looking at cardiovascular disease risk. So when we gave patients Clomid, we were noticing an almost universal rise in their Desmond levels. Now, the most obvious explanation for that, though the last time I looked, I couldn't find clear explanation for this in any of the clinical, like the clinical trials that led to the approval of Clomid. So I don't know if it was described.
Peter Attia: Correct. Yeah. I mean, I think the easiest way to go about doing this is just give the hormone that's missing without attention to where the deficiency is. Why this becomes relevant is if you have a 35 year old guy whose testosterone is low, but you can demonstrate that it's low because he's not getting enough of a signal from the pituitary. Why would you bother giving him more testosterone when he has the capacity, he has the Ladig cells and the sirtooli cells to make testosterone? He just needs the signal. Sometimes, though not always. Just a course of Clomid can wake him up and he's back to making normal testosterone.

Andrew Huberman: So he'll do this three times a week, 50 milligrams, three times a week for a short course?

Peter Attia: Yeah, we would do it for eight to twelve weeks and then we reevaluate.

Andrew Huberman: And estrogen and testosterone will increase in parallel?

Peter Attia: Yes. And again, it depends. Aromatase activity is dependent on how much body fat you have and genetics. And if estradiol gets too high, we think if it gets over about 55, 60, we will give micro doses of an astrozol. But it has to be real micro doses. I mean, you cannot pound people with an Astrozole to, to give you perspective, the the sort of on label use, like if you just go to a pharmacy and order an Astrozole, you're going to get 1 MG tablets. Like we can't give anybody a milligram.

Andrew Huberman: They'll feel like garbage.

Peter Attia: We have to have it compounded at 0.1 milligrams, and we might give a patient zero one, two to three times a week. That would be a big dose of an astrozole.

Andrew Huberman: Yeah, I think that the typical TRT clinic out there is giving 200 milligrams Peter mill, one mil, 200 milligrams of testosterone once every two weeks, and then hitting people with multiple milligrams of an astrozole, and they're all over the place.

Peter Attia: I've never really understood. I mean, I guess I shouldn't be surprised, but it kind of blows my mind that these TRT clinics are up all over the place, given how bad I mean, I see the results because I have patients that come from them, and I don't understand why they're so incompetent.

Andrew Huberman: I actually think it's worse than that. I think that they simply don't understand and don't care because it's a pill mill and it's a money mill. I think that nowadays it seems almost everybody who's doing TRT is taking lower doses more frequently every other day or twice a week, dividing the dose and being very careful with these estrogen or aromatase blockers.
Andrew Huberman: We've talked a little bit about the fact that some people taking things like an astrozole to reduce aromatase activity can potentially run into trouble because they think, oh, well, more testosterone good, lower estrogen bad. And then they end up with issues like joint pain, memory issues, and severe drops in libido. And I think a lot of the.

Peter Attia: Reasons and even fat accumulation. So if estrogen is too low, you can develop adiposity in a way that you wouldn't otherwise. There's a great New England Journal paper, it's probably ten years old now that looked at, I believe it was five different doses of testosterone cipionate. So these men were chemically castrated and divided into ten groups. It's pretty remarkable somebody signed up for this study. Yeah. So you were with and without anastrozol and five doses of testosterone. Okay. So now you basically had five testosterone levels plus or minus, high or low estradiol. And the results were really clear that the higher your testosterone and the more your estradiol was in kind of that 30 to 50 range, the better you were. So if estrogen was too low, even in the presence of high testosterone, the outcomes were less significant.

Andrew Huberman: And this is 30 to 50 nanograms per deciliter, not 30% to 50% of one's testosterone. Okay, great.

Peter Attia: Okay.

Andrew Huberman: But Clomid is we have not talked a lot about Clomid. I'd love to get your thoughts on Clomid.

Peter Attia: So Clomophine is a fertility drug. It's a synthetic hormone. It's actually two drugs, m, Clonafine and I forget the other one and it tells the pituitary to secrete Fsh and LH. The advantage of Clomid is it's oral, and it's meant to be taken orally. So a typical starting dose would be like 50 milligrams three times a week. And if you do that, you'll notice in most men, especially young men, fsh LH goes up. In any man, the Fsh and LH go up. But if a man still has testicular reserve, he'll make lots of testosterone in response to that. Because that's the first order question we're trying to answer. Is your failure to make testosterone central or peripheral?

Andrew Huberman: Yeah. And I think I just want to point out again, correct me if I'm wrong, but my understanding is that a lot of the drugs that we're talking about, the synthetic compounds, testosterone, estrogen, things related to growth hormone, et cetera were discovered and designed in order to treat and exercise me, in order to isolate and treat exactly these kinds of syndromes, whether or not it was the hypothalamus, the pituitary or the target tissue, the ovaries or the testes. Correct?
Andrew Huberman: Luckily, my prostate specific antigen is low, and Dht, the things I know can reduce it are things like finasteride, propecia, things like things that people take to try and avoid hair loss can dramatically reduce Dht and lead to all sorts of terrible sexual side effects, mood based side effects, et cetera. I'm not aware of anything that can be taken in supplementation form that can really profoundly drop.

Peter Attia: We don't spend much attention on it anymore, basically. I used to have a much more complicated differential diagnosis eight years ago. I would drive patients nuts with the whiteboard diagrams I would draw for them, and in the end, I think they were just like, dude, just what do I need to take? Today we take a much more simple approach. So the first question is, should you or should you have your free testosterone be higher? That's the metric I care about, is free testosterone is the first most important. The second most important is estradiol.

Andrew Huberman: And sorry to interrupt you. You said if you look at your total testosterone, you want the free T to be about 2% of your well, it should be.

Peter Attia: I might not change that anymore. So, in other words, if a guy's at 1%, then I know I have to really boost his total testosterone. If he's only going to get one to one and a half percent of it converted to free, I need to boost him. And that's why I don't care if he's outside the range. I'll have a guy who's free tea. I might have to get a guy's total T up to 1500 to get his free T to 18.

Andrew Huberman: I see. So free T is the target.

Peter Attia: I like, free T is what we treat.

Andrew Huberman: And do you still use antivirxandro? Sorry. To try and lower SHPG because it's too potent?

Peter Attia: No, because it's just too complicated for patients. It's a drug that can't be taken orally, so you have to take it under the tongue, like Atrocious or something. Right. But then I had one patient once who, even though we told him about 87 times, that he was, like, swallowing the anivars and his liver function, and he was like, we're talking ten milligrams, three times a week as a tiny dose and three months of him or whatever, two months of him swallowing that every time. Tripled his liver function test. So I was like, it's just not worth the hassle of doing this for perfection. In reality, we can fix this another way. So the first order question is, do we believe clinically you will benefit from normalizing your free testosterone or taking it to a level that's call it eighty th to ninety th percentile? So upper normal limit of physiologic ranges? That's the first order question. And that's going to come down to symptoms and that's going to come down to some biomarkers.

Peter Attia: I think there's two years ago was it two years ago or maybe a year ago? Very good study came out that looked at prediabetic men. You've probably talked about this study and looking at insulin resistance and glucose disposal with and without testosterone. And the evidence was overwhelmingly clear. Testosterone improves glycemic control. Testosterone improves insulin signaling. This shouldn't be surprising, by the way, given the role muscles play as a glucose reservoir and a glucose sink. So now I include that as one of the things that we will consider as a factor for using testosterone. Now, again, it's not the only one. So you can accomplish that with exercise, you can accomplish that with these other things, but then you get into a little bit of the vicious cycle of will having a normalized testosterone facilitate you doing those things better? So let's just assume we come to the decision that this person is a good candidate for testosterone replacement therapy.

Peter Attia: The next question is, what's the method? We're going to do it? Are we going to do it indirectly or directly? Now, we used to use a lot of Clomid in our practice and have you talked about Clomid on the I.

Andrew Huberman: Haven'T talked too much about it, no.
Peter Attia: So then the same as with estradiol, so except in the opposite direction. So higher estradiol is higher Shbg. So, again, occasionally you'll see a guy with normal testosterone, but he's a very high aromatase activity person, so he has a lot of the enzyme that converts testosterone into estradiol. You can lower estradiol a bit with an aromatase inhibitor and that can bring down Shbg. Now, again, these things individually are rarely enough to move the needle. The last is thyroxine. So if you have a person whose thyroid is out of whack, you have to fix that before you if their T four is out of whack, you're going to interfere with SHPG. There are also some supplements, which I think you've probably talked about these on the podcast. I feel like I've heard you talk about these on the podcast.

Andrew Huberman: Yeah, there are a few that will adjust. There is this idea now, there's a much better review that just came out. I'll send it to you. I'd love your thoughts on it and I've been perusing it line by line, but I love input from experts like you on the use of Tonga Ali for reducing Hpg. In my experience, it does free up some testosterone, by which mechanism it isn't exactly clear and the effects aren't that dramatic. They're probably multiple effects. For all we know, it increases libido and it does generally by way of increasing estrogen slightly, which can also increase libido in some individuals. So we don't know the exact mode of action. So we've talked about a few. The one that a few years back people were claiming could reduce Shbg was stinging nettles. Stinging nettle? Well, urinating seems to be coming up multiple times on this podcast, for whatever reason. Stinging nettle extract. I took the the most pronounced effect of that was you could basically urinate over a car. And when taking SHPG, what the underlying mechanism of that was, I do not know.

Andrew Huberman: I took it for a short while. It didn't drop my SHPG very much, but it did drop my Dht sufficiently so that I stopped taking it. I do not like anything that impedes Dht. I don't care if my hairline retreats. I don't care about any of that. Dht to me, is something to be coveted and held onto because you feel so much better when your Dht is in the appropriate range. And love your thoughts on that.

Peter Attia: Yeah, it really depends on the guy, and it depends on what risk you're trying to manage. Right. So prostate size starts to become one of the issues with Dht.
Peter Attia: A micro dose of this has to be small enough that it doesn't impair your body's ability to make testosterone. But Anivar has such a high affinity for Shbg that it basically distracts your Shbg from binding your testosterone, freeing up testosterone. That's exactly right. So the goal was, how do I just give you more free testosterone? So if a patient shows up and they've got a total testosterone of 900 nanograms per deciliter, which would place them at depending on the scale you look at, the scale we look at, that would place you at about the 70th percentile. But your free testosterone is eight nanograms per deciliter, so that's pretty bad. That means you're less than 1% free. A guy should be about 2% free tea. So that dude should be closer to 16 to 18 nanograms per deciliter. So in that situation that I just gave you, his Shbg is really high. His Shbg is probably in the 80 to 90 range.

Andrew Huberman: That's very high. Yeah, because I think the upper range is somewhere around 55, 56.

Peter Attia: Exactly. So we would first backstall for what's driving is Shbg. So there's basically three hormones. So genetics plays a huge role in this. There's no question that just out of the box. People have a different set point for Shbg. Mine is incredibly low. My SHPG is like kind of in the but from a hormone perspective, there's basically three hormones that run it. So estradiol being probably the most important, insulin and thyroxine. So we're going to look at all of those and decide if any of those are playing a role. So insulin suppresses it. So this is actually the great irony of helping a person get metabolically healthy is in the short run, you can actually lower their free testosterone, all things equal, because as insulin comes down, Shbg goes up and if testosterone hasn't gone up with it, you're lowering free testosterone.

Andrew Huberman: So somebody who goes on a very low carbohydrate diet and attempt to drop some water and drop some weight is going to increase their SHPG.

Peter Attia: Yeah, if their insulin goes bind up.

Andrew Huberman: Testosterone, less free testosterone. I can tell the carnivore diet people are going to be coming after me with bone marrow in hand. But then again, after this discussion extends a little further, I'm sure the vegans will be coming after me with celery stalks.
Andrew Huberman: When one looks on social media and the internet, there seems to be a younger and younger cohort of guys, people in their teens and 20s, showing up to the table thinking that injecting testosterone, cipionate or taking Anivar or whatever it is, is going to be the right idea. There mainly seem to be focused on cosmetic effects. I'm not a physician, so I can't say whether or not they were actually hypogonadal, et cetera. But it seems to me again, correct me if I'm wrong, but it seems to me that similar to the Attia rule as it relates to longevity that we could come up with a broad contour rule in which if a male of any age is not trying to get decent sleep, exercise appropriately appropriate nutrition, minding their social connections, et cetera, et cetera. The idea of going straight to testosterone seems like a bad idea.

Andrew Huberman: That said, just like with depression and antidepressants, there is a kind of a cliff, after which low enough testosterone or low enough serotonin prevents people from sleeping, exercise, social connection, et cetera. So I do want to acknowledge that. But with that in mind, how do you think about, and perhaps occasionally prescribe and direct your patients in terms of hormone hormone replacement therapy? Men, person in their 30s, person in their 40s who's doing almost all the other things correctly. What sorts of levels do you think are meaningful? Because the range is tremendous. In terms of blood tests, 300 nanograms per deciliter. I think on the low end. Now, in the US. All the way up to 900 or 1200, that's an enormous range. What are some of the other hormones you like to look at? Estrogen dht and so on.

Peter Attia: Lots unpacked there. So let's start with the ranges. Right. So the ranges you gave are for total testosterone, of course. And we don't spend a lot of time looking at that the way we used the way we you know, I used to spend more time looking at total and free when I had when I used more tricks to modulate it. So I'm actually far more simple in my manipulation of testosterone today than I was six or seven years ago. Six or seven years ago, we would use a micro dose of Anivar to lower Shbg in a person who had normal testosterone, but low free testosterone.

Andrew Huberman: What was a low dose of Anivar in that context?

Peter Attia: Ten milligrams Subling, two to three times a week.

Andrew Huberman: Anivar basically being Dht oxandrolone.

Peter Attia: Exactly.

Andrew Huberman: And again, we're not recommending this, actually. If you're playing a competitive sport can get you banned from that sport. It can also get you banned from having children if you do it incorrectly.
Peter Attia: The most potent drug of the lot is the PCSK nine inhibitor. So PCSK nine is a protein that was discovered in the late ninety s, I believe is responsible for the degradation of LDL receptors. This was first discovered in people who had a condition called familial hypercholesterolemia or FH. So these are people that have incredibly high cholesterol. Typically their total cholesterol level is 300. Their LDL cholesterol is typically north of 200 milligrams per deciliter. This is a disease that is defined by the phenotype, not the genotype. So the phenotype has a very clear definition which I basically just gave you the genotype is there's a million paths to get there. There's over 3000 mutations that are known to produce that phenotype. This was discovered to be one of them in people who had hyper functioning PCSK nine this protein was just constantly hammering and destroying the LDL receptors. And so their LDL would be huge and by extension their total cholesterol would be. So in 2006, Helen hobbes and colleagues discovered an opposite group of population people who had LDL cholesterol naturally of ten to 20 milligrams per deciliter which would be an ApoB of about 20 milligrams per deciliter and who never got heart disease.

Peter Attia: They were immune to heart disease no matter how long they live. And they had the opposite. They had hypo functioning PCSK nine and so that was 2006 in the new england journal of medicine that basically got a whole bunch of drug companies hot on the trail of producing a drug to mimic it. So now we have these antibodies and they're wildly effective.

Andrew Huberman: What percentage of your patients over 45 do you have on either a statin or on one of these other?

Peter Attia: Well, often it's in combinations and I would say 80% we have to remember what our objective is we're in the business of trying to make sure people live as long as possible and you have to take a sort of world view of this right? What's the most prevalent cause of death globally? Say cardiovascular disease how close is it? So the last year before COVID COVID kind of messes up these numbers a little bit. But if you go to 2019, 18.6 million people died of heart disease. Number two cancer. 10 million. Nothing's in the zip code of atherosclerosis. And if you remember what I just said if you took everybody in their twenty s and reduced them to a level of that of a child you'd make as CBD an orphan disease.

Andrew Huberman: Why don't we hear more about this? I realize there's some nuance it's not straightforward it's not as simple as saying eat less cheese, red meat and watch your LDL get on a statin but why do we hear so little about ApoB in the general discussion? Social media is such a skewed landscape as we know people shouting into tunnels of varying clarity some are beautiful bronze tunnels with clean walls and others are sewer lines right? And they all converge in the same place as we know but why do we hear so little about this? I mean I'm not on a statin but now I'm beginning to think that maybe that might be a good idea to consider one of these other compounds I don't know the last time I looked at my ApoB specifically I'm guessing my physician did but why don't we. Hear more about this?
Andrew Huberman: Okay, so let me give you an example of an exercise snack for enhancing your long duration endurance. Twelve minutes or longer. And this is the sort of thing that if you are going to incorporate into your routine, and I highly recommend that you do, can essentially be done anytime with no warm up. A good example of an exercise snack of this type would be to suddenly stand up from your desk and to do 100 jumping jacks. Now, depending on how fit you are and how fast you do those jumping jacks and how wide and tall you do those jumping jacks. Meaning? Are you doing these kind of little things where your hands don't actually meet and your hand, like, parting your legs just a little bit? Or are you doing full jumping jacks where you're really jumping and setting your feet out as wide as you comfortably and safely can and then bring your hands together? It could take you anywhere from 30 seconds to 90 seconds. Okay? So in the case of jumping jacks, you may end up doing this for 90 seconds, but the point is to simply do 100 jumping jacks. Or if that takes too long, you could even do just 25 or 50 jumping jacks.

Andrew Huberman: The point is that it's going to get you moving your muscles, it's going to get your heart rate up even if you're very, very fit. If you're doing these fast enough and you're doing them with proper form, it's going to get your heart rate up and then you're done. You can sit back down to your desk or you can continue to walk through the airport. Yes, I've done these in the airport. Typically not while walking toward my gate, but at the gate, but occasionally I'm feeling lethargic or I haven't had the opportunity to train that day and perhaps I won't get the opportunity to train. So I'll do something like 100 jumping jacks while facing the window. So it feels a little less awkward facing people while you're doing them. And of course you don't have to do jumping jacks. An equally effective type of exercise snack is to find a stairwell and to simply go up that stairwell as fast as you safely can for 20 to 30 seconds. So perhaps just find the bottom of a stairwell and go up that stairwell as quickly as you can and perhaps go down as quickly as you can and just keep doing that for about 20 to 40 seconds and then you're essentially done.

Andrew Huberman: You could also opt to pick some distance away from your car in the parking lot, assuming you're not carrying any heavy bags or anything, and simply run to your car. So 20 to 30 seconds of not necessarily all out sprinting, you don't want to injure yourself because again, this is done without a warm up. These exercise snacks are designed to be inserted into your day and into your week essentially at random. You could plan them if you want, but anytime you feel inspired, or perhaps anytime you're feeling like you don't want to do one, you could simply do one of these exercise snacks. And of course doing jumping jacks or running to your car or taking the stairs very quickly up and down, or just up and then walking down for instance, and doing a few jumping jacks. Things of that sort of course can take on a near infinite number of different variations. So if you don't like any of the variations that I just presented, you can easily come up with something else. Again, the purpose of these exercise snacks is to get your heart rate up.
Peter Attia: It takes a while to get people up to dose. So if you're looking at semaglutide, the dose that was studied, so did a one year trial, or maybe it was a little over that maybe 60 weeks, but it took about 16 weeks to get the patients comfortably up to 2.4 milligrams weekly, which was the dose that they ultimately stayed on. In our experience, when we use it, we don't even usually go up to 2.4 milligrams. We can usually get enough benefit between one and two milligrams, and we usually move people along a little bit quicker. But we've definitely had our share of patients who can't tolerate it due to the nausea.

Andrew Huberman: Interesting.

Peter Attia: Which might be part of how it's working, right, is the sort of suppression of appetite which, if taken to an extreme, can produce nausea.

Andrew Huberman: Interesting.

Peter Attia: Yeah. I think most of the effect of semiclutide is central, not peripheral, so I don't know.

Andrew Huberman: I saw one paper that GLP one is acting both on cells in the periphery to cause gut distension in some ways, or sort of make people feel full through promotion of literally mechanical receptors that make people feel as if their stomach is distended even though their stomach is empty. And then perhaps some central hypothalamic effects.

Peter Attia: Is that yeah, I would bet 80% of it's in the hypothalamus. It is also improving insulin sensitivity in the periphery, but I don't think that that's accounting for much of its benefit.

Andrew Huberman: Super interesting.

Peter Attia: And there's next gen versions of these that seem to be more long lasting. So right now, if you look at coming off semaglutide, you're going to see a weight regain. So there's newer versions that seem to preserve the weight loss, even off the drug. So it begs the ultimate question, which is, like, what's the total use case for this going to be? Is this going to be a drug you cycle on and off, or is it going to be a drug that a person has to stay on indefinitely? And if so, will they become tachyphylactic? Will they gain a resistance to it? So it's still super early days on these things.

Andrew Huberman: My hope is that it would be a little bit like the way that you describe testosterone and estrogen therapies, that it would allow people to do more of the behavioral work that's absolutely required for health span and lifespan.
Andrew Huberman: Speaking of frontiers, I hear a lot nowadays about GLP one and pharmacology, that prescription drugs that mimic or increase GLP one directly, glucagon like peptides. People are talking about this as the blockbuster obesity drug. I haven't heard this much talk about a drug to adjust human body weight favorably since the discussions of fenfen when I was in college. And then of course, fenfen was pulled from the market because people were dying, not left and right, but enough people died that they pulled it from the market.

Peter Attia: Which by the way, is an interesting story. It was the enantomer that they chose to use that was the wrong enantomer and what it resulted in was god, I think it was like some mitral valve. Was it MVP? Yeah, it was something in the mitral valve. Yeah, I think the corte tendin were rupturing in the mitral valve and it was mostly young women I think were getting horrible pulmonary disease as a result of it. Probably pulmonary hypertension or something like that. But there were two enantomers of the drug and had they just used the other one, this issue wouldn't have happened. And there was a stupid reason why they made the choice to use the one they did. And it's one of those things where once you make the mistake, you're never going back. It's not like that company could say, okay, we want to do over but we're going to do it with the right version. So it's a tragic outcome, but you're absolutely right.

Peter Attia: I think the GLP one agonists have more efficacy and for all intensity and for everything we can see, certainly seems safer.

Andrew Huberman: Are you excited about them?

Peter Attia: Yeah, I am. Yeah, I think we're just seeing the kind of tip of the iceberg. They're not miracle drugs, right. They come with problems. Right. Which is they're catabolic across the board. So patients are losing fat, but they're losing muscle as well.

Andrew Huberman: Just sent all the gym jockeys running from semiglutin. That's all you have to say. All you have to say nowadays about something is that it's going to drop testosterone, lower fertility, change someone's skin, hair or nails, and it could extend life to being 250 years old and people are gone. Humans are human. That's a neuroscience and psychology issue, not a biology medicine issue. But I'm pleased to hear that you're excited by them, because I hear a lot of excitement. I haven't heard anything disastrous about them.
Andrew Huberman: Shifting to a less esoteric and I think probably more important topic overall, metabolomics. Talking about this before we sat down to record what is what are metabolomics? Why should we be thinking about them? I have some idea of what it might be about, but most people, I think, are not thinking about metabolomics at all. And for those that are, I'm sure they could learn more. So tell us about metabolomics and what you'd like to see more of in the world of metabolomics.

Peter Attia: Yeah, so omics is just the term that we use to describe the study of something. So genomics, right, is, like, the broad study of genes and proteomics, the broad study of proteins and things like that. So metabolomics is the study of metabolites. And metabolites, unlike a lot of these other things, they're a relatively finite number of these things, many of which are known, but some of which are not known. So glucose is a metabolite. acetylCoA is a metabolite. Lactate is a metabolite. And so the question is, what do we know about these things and how they work? And more importantly, what do we know about certain physiologic states and the metabolomic profile that results from them? So let's use two extreme examples, like exercise. Everybody understands the data are unambiguously clear. Exercise produces about the most favorable phenotype imaginable. So if you wanted to take a genomics approach to understanding that, you might look at, is there a change in the genome when you exercise? And the answer is probably not. But maybe if you looked at the methylation patterns and epigenome, you could look at epigenomic studies, but you might instead look at kind of the proteomic side of that, like what is gene expression doing? And there you would see a lot of changes.

Peter Attia: Well, what I don't think people are really understanding, although there was a very interesting paper that just came out two weeks ago that looks for novel metabolites that are changing. Is there a huge signal in a metabolomic profile that looks different in the state of exercise versus nonexercise? And could that represent part of how exercise is transmitting its benefit through the body? People always talk about the Holy Grail of metabolomics would be can you find a pill to mimic exercise? And I think the answer to that question is going to be undoubtedly no for a couple of reasons. One, even if you could mimic the longevity sort of lifespan parts of it, you could never mimic the health span parts of it. But what if you could do both, right? What if there were small molecules that can replicate some of the protective benefits of exercise and you could combine those with exercise? What if those could be treatments for other disease states like diabetes, things like that. So that's why I think this field of metabolomics is relatively untapped and I think potentially the next sort of frontier.
Peter Attia: That was the right patient population to get that. So will we ever get there? I don't know because I don't see what the incentive is, right? You have people who are making money hand over fist doing procedures on the basis of I'm not sure what, what would their motivation or incentive be to sort of see this legitimized. You'd really have to be able to say, well there really needs to be sort of a pharma angle to this. It's sort of one of the wishes I had, right? Like if I was a billionaire, I feel like the way I would probably waste all of my money would be running clinical trials on stuff nobody cared about.

Andrew Huberman: Likewise I would join you because that would be yesterday we recorded a sit down with somebody from Caltech who works on aggression and rage and other things related to that and has identified peptides that are approved. The FDA for other reasons that seem to adjust anxiety, might even adjust aggression, pathologic aggression, and went off onto a long description of why none of these drugs exist on the market for the treatment of psychiatric illness and yet probably would work. And what's missing is a billionaire or a billion dollar company that is willing to invest in something that very likely will work but the market value isn't quite there or it failed in a previous trial and so no one wants to touch it with a ten foot pole. Hopefully someone listening to this will be incentivized to provide this sort of venue for the kind of work that we're talking about. I have to ask, but I want.

Peter Attia: To make one other point, Andrew, which is to me the problem with a lot of these things is it's a crutch. It's sort of like what we talked about with like, hey, just fix my team man and everything's going to be fine. And it's like, no, that's just the beginning. What I worry about when I see people who are clamoring for this stuff is a lot of times they don't realize that whether it's psychologically or otherwise, they sort of say, well now that I've had this thing done, I don't have to do the hard work of the real rehab. I mean, if I've learned anything through my shoulder surgery and I'm now three and a half months out, how does it feel? Amazing. I mean, look, I still can't do a lot of stuff. It's going to be a while. I haven't even been able to shoot a bow yet and it'll probably be a year before I'll go back to long dead hangs and heavy deadlifts. I don't know, maybe nine months, but I'm not there yet. But what I learned through a really amazing prehab and rehab process is you just got to do the work, and it's freaking hard.

Peter Attia: Shoulders are the most tedious, boring thing in the world. I mean, three days a week I am doing four days a week, I am doing 1 hour of just dedicated stuff for this shoulder that is super uncomfortable, super boring, super frustrating. But I have faith in the methodology, right? And I think a lot of people are saying, just shoot the stem cells into me, and I don't have to do any of that stuff. And the reality of it is, I think that's a very dangerous place to be.

Andrew Huberman: Have you ever tried BPC? One five, seven?

Peter Attia: Yeah, we tried it again maybe seven, eight years ago. We had a bunch of patients ask about it. So my view is, okay, I was pretty convinced that there was no safety downside to it, so I was like, Well, I wouldn't prescribe it to a patient unless I tried it myself. So me and another doc in the practice, Ralph, we did it for, I don't know, a couple of months. I didn't notice a single thing.

Andrew Huberman: Interesting. Well, thank you for that.
Peter Attia: Though it might seem to have some efficacy in some indications. For example, maybe when it comes to early hair loss, maybe when it comes to certain joint issues. But the reality of it is I think we just have to accept the fact that everything we do has an opportunity cost. And that opportunity cost is sometimes financial. But I actually find a lot of times it's in time and effort and energy that goes into something. Now, when I was waiting to get my shoulder surgery, this is an injury that I've had forever, right? This is an injury. This injury was actually probably the greatest source of discomfort I had swimming the Catalina channel the last time in 2009. So that tells you how long I've had this injury. But I sort of knew at some point I'm going to have to have it fixed. And I sort of went down this rabbit hole like, hey, is there anything I can do to avoid having surgery? Would infusing a million stem cells into it work? And in speaking with as many orthopedic surgeons as I could, the answer was kind of unambiguously no. And by the way, it doesn't mean you wouldn't feel better if I injected a bunch of stem cells into your shoulder.

Peter Attia: There are a lot of reasons that might make you feel better, just like there are a bunch of reasons you can feel better if somebody injects saline directly into your joint. The question is, is it going to fix the underlying problem? And if so, will it do so? By what mechanism? So I'm pretty sure that if you took 1000 people with my particular injury and injected them with stem cells it wouldn't do a thing. Because of the nature of my injury, I had a complete laboral tear. Are there some injuries that might benefit from it? Yeah, possible. So the question is, how would you design the trial to narrow down your patient population correctly so that you might see a signal because the other risk of doing a trial is you have too much of a heterogeneous patient population, you don't know what the heck you're really doing and you get meaningless results. You get a null result when in fact there's a small signal but you were underpowered to pick it up because you only had 10% of your patient population.
Andrew Huberman: The esoteric question relates to something that I think is a little bit niche, but not necessarily so, which is peptides and stem cells in PRP. I don't want to go off on too much of a tangent on rehab, but I know you've done a number of posts on social media recently that I have to tell you are really thoughtful. And I really appreciate that you're willing to share your own tissue rehabilitation experience and point people. That because this is a landscape that a lot of people are in and they don't know how to navigate it. And a mutual friend of ours, not to be named, sent me a text and said I'm going to be talking to Attia. And what do you know about studies on things like BPC one five seven, this, gastric peptides that, anecdotally, again, anecdotally. People report getting injections of this into shoulder, knee, et cetera, and feeling so much better, so much faster. But there really aren't good studies, controlled studies, and you hear all the same sorts of things about plateletrich, plasma, PRP, which if someone tells you there are a lot of stem cells in them, they're lying, there's not a lot of stem cells in them. And you also hear about stem cells which are not FDA approved, at least for most uses in this country, but are certainly people are flying down to Colombia and getting injections. And what is your understanding or experience with things like BPC One five seven?

Andrew Huberman: Specifically, because peptides is a huge landscape, we should probably do a whole episode on peptides, things like PRP, PRP is now approved for, I mean, women are getting injections of this into their ovaries to improve follicle count. We know this. People are getting injections of PRP into every tissue and organ. Hell, men are getting injected in their penis, so I hear, for all sorts of reasons that are unclear to me. What's the deal with PRP, BPC One five seven and stem cells? Do you ever see interesting effects? Are you curious about these compounds? Do you prescribe or direct people towards these, the FDA approved ones?

Peter Attia: Of course. Yeah, so short answer is I'm definitely curious about them and I'd love to see the work done. But I also think this is about as wild, wild west as it gets PRP, less so, but certainly stem cells and peptides. And I just think if you're going to do something without a clinical trial you got to show up with a lot more data, right? So let's use Rapamycin as an example, right? I'm a huge proponent of Rapamycin and you can say, well Peter, how can you take or prescribe Rapamycin for zero protective effects when we do not have a human clinical trial demonstrating that it lengthens life? And the answer is because I have 84 other pieces of data that all point in the same direction across every model organism going back more than a billion years and that's really different from Joey, Sammy and Sally did this thing and I think it works and they just can't be compared. Now I have no idea if stem cells work. I have no idea if BPC one five seven works. I have no idea frankly if PRP even works.
Andrew Huberman: This sounds so important sounds like the most important conversation because all the hormone stuff and all the stuff about smoking and head injuries and ADHD and all the rest, I mean, is irrelevant if you're dead, right?

Peter Attia: Yeah, it's a great question. I don't think I have a great insight as to why this isn't more front and center. I think the bigger problem is why don't we even understand how to think about it? And there's a whole chapter in my book I'm working on that really gets to this problem of why aren't we looking at atherosclerosis in terms of treating the causative agent. Instead, we look at modifying tenure risk. So that's the fundamental difference between what I call Medicine 2.0 and Medicine 3.0. Medicine 2.0, which is what we're generally practicing today when it comes to asCBD, says, look, we will treat you. We will lower that LDL cholesterol. They still don't talk about ApoB, but that's a very American thing. If you go outside of the United States, everybody's talking about ApoB. It's in the guidelines in Europe and Canada and everywhere else. The United States is very stubborn on this, and it's due to a couple of really weird personalities in the lipid world. But the paradigm is when your ten year risk reaches 5%, when there's a 5% chance that you're going to have a heart attack, estrogen or die in the next ten years, now it's time to treat you.

Peter Attia: Medicine 3.0 says, that's not the way to think about it. You treat the causative agent. If there's a causative agent, you treat it. If blood pressure raises the risk of heart disease, you lower blood pressure. If smoking raises the risk of something, you treat smoking. And the reason that the risk model is so bad when you're looking at ten year risk is age is the biggest driver of risk. I mean, bar none, right? So if you take a 70 year old with perfect lipids and perfect blood pressure and perfect everything, their ten year risk of ASCVD is probably four to five times higher than the most unhealthy 30 year old. It's not even close.

Andrew Huberman: It's a lot like eye disease. There are exceptions, of course, but you always say that the biggest risk factor for going blind from glaucoma is being an older person, frankly.

Peter Attia: So if you could identify what the risk factors are for glaucoma, imagine if the paradigm was we're only going to treat it when your risk of blindness reaches 5%, which isn't triggered until you're old enough anyway. Wouldn't you rather know that when you're 30 and say, wait, if maybe being in the sun without sunglasses or using this type of eyedrop or something like that has a negative impact, I would rather know that sooner. So that's the fundamental difference. It's a philosophical difference with respect to prevention. And I will acknowledge that in one element of prevention, I make no consideration. I am only coming at this through the lens of the individual. I am never coming at this through the lens of society. That makes my life easier and it makes the problem I'm solving easier. I don't have to answer the quality adjusted life year problem. I don't have to ask the question, is it economical to treat people at 30? I don't know the answer to that question. But I also know that when you're trying to solve really complicated problems, the more you can simplify, the better. So I've just acknowledged openly not solving that.

Peter Attia: If you want to criticize me for it, that's fine, let's be transparent. But all I care about is the person I'm sitting across from. And in that situation, it's really their decision if they can justify the cost of treatment.

Andrew Huberman: An esoteric question and then a less esoteric question.
Andrew Huberman: Okay, so then Monday rolls around and I, like most everyone else out there, I work on Monday, I get right into my emails and preparation for podcasts and running my laboratory, et cetera. However, I make sure that at some point on Monday, and for me that some point is typically and ideally early in the morning, so 7:00 AM or so, I train my legs on Monday, so that includes quadriceps, hamstrings, and calves. Why do I do that workout on Monday? And what is that workout designed to do? Well, that workout is really designed to make sure that I'm either maintaining or building strength in my legs. And this is not simply for aesthetic reasons. This is not simply to grow bigger calves or grow bigger quadriceps and hamstrings, although it can accomplish that as well depending on how you train. We'll talk about details of training. The reason for training legs on Monday is several fold.

Andrew Huberman: First of all, they are the largest muscle groups of the body, and by training your legs on Monday, it sets in motion a large number of metabolic processes that carry you some distance even through the whole week in terms of elevating metabolism, in terms of amplifying certain hormonal events in your body, et cetera, that are really beneficial. In addition to that, I'm of the belief that the legs are the foundation of the body, and provided you can train legs safely, that training legs is vitally important, not just for strength of the legs, but also for strength of your entire body. Again, some of that is through systemic hormonal effects because if you're going to train the large muscle groups of your body under substantial loads, you will get systemic release of hormones, not just testosterone, although certainly testosterone, but also things like growth hormone...

Andrew Huberman: You get increases in all sorts of so-called anabolic hormones that even if you're somebody who's not trying to increase muscle size, because I realize a lot of people are not trying to do that, these are hormones that shift your metabolism and your overall tendon strength and ligament strength and overall musculature into what I would call a strong foundation. So for me, Monday is leg workout. It also just feels good to get the leg workout out of the way earlier in the week, and it accomplishes another goal, which is that I sometimes will take one or two days off of a leg workout because they can be very intense and they are large muscle groups, and I'll explain what I do on the off days, they're not pure off days, they actually include some recovery type training or even some all out training. But by training legs on Monday, I'm able to get what I consider the hardest strength and hypertrophy workout out of the way, and, again, set all those positive physiological effects in motion for the entire week.

Andrew Huberman: The other thing is that no workout exists in isolation. What you do one day is going to be determined by what you did the previous day. And even though the previous day I may have taken a three hour weight vested hike, never are my legs so sore from that long slow endurance work, because it is long and slow, that I'm unable to train legs. Contrast that with a, say, high intensity interval training workout, which comes later in the week, and my legs might be sore. In fact, they might not even be recovered such that I'm able to do a real legwork, I want to say a real workout. I'll describe what that means in a moment. So legs come on Monday, and I think that for those of you that are using or interested in using resistance training, I suggest getting your leg workout done early in the week. And for those of you that have heard the phrase, don't skip leg day, I will go a step further and say, don't skip leg day, in fact, make leg day your first day of strength and hypertrophy training.

Andrew Huberman: Put it on Monday.
Peter Attia: Exactly. Right. We call it backcasting. So the first step we do is once we've really delineated what the objective function looks like, we then say, okay, how do you break down that into metrics that we can measure? So you describe doing a whole bunch of things. Okay, just to let you know, to do that will require A-V-O two max of 30 oxygen per minute per kilogram. And the person will say, okay, what does that mean? We'll say, well, that's a measure of your maximal uptake of oxygen, and that declines at about 8% to 10% per decade. So if you have to be at 30 and let's just assume you're going to be doing that at 90, so what do you need to be at? 80, 70, 60? Okay, here's what it would need to be at 50. Okay, what are you now? There's a big gap. You're below where you need to be now. So you're obviously higher than 30 now. But if you're only at 42 now and you need to be at 30 and 40 years, you're not going to cut it. You have to be a lot fitter. Okay.

Peter Attia: Now let's do the same exercise around strength and stability. And without exception, most people when they do this exercise will find out they're well below where they need to be. So the gravity of aging is more vicious than people realize, and therefore the height of your glider needs to be much higher than you think it is. When you're our age, if you want to be able to do the things we probably want to be able to do when we're 90.

Andrew Huberman: I absolutely love this approach. I've never done it in terms of my health. I've always thought about what I want to accomplish in the next three to six months or next year or so.

Peter Attia: And by the way, that's a great approach. That's forecasting. Forecasting is fantastic. Forecasting is really good at short term things. It doesn't work for long term things. Long term, you have to do backcasting.

Andrew Huberman: This backcasting approach really appeals to me because in my career, exercise me, I never anticipated I'd be podcasting, but that's what I did. At some point as an undergraduate, I looked professors. That looks like a pretty good life. They seem pretty happy. I talked to a few of them, and then I figured out what I need to do at each stage in order to get to that next rung on the ladder and just kind of figured it out in a back casting kind of way, as you refer to it. I think it's incredibly useful because it puts all the questions about blood work and how often to get blood work and what to measure in a really nice context. That's a highly individualized I've never heard of this before, and I should give.

Peter Attia: A nod to Annie Duke. I used to always refer to this as reverse engineering, but in Annie Duke's book, she wrote about this exact thing and called it backcasting, and I was like, I like the term backcasting better. I think it's more intuitive than reverse engineering.

Andrew Huberman: Yeah, there's a real genius to it because it sets so many things into the appropriate bins and trajectories.
Peter Attia: It's a very serious exercise, right? Like what? Tell me everything that is going to happen in your marginal decade. I don't know when it's going to be. Andrew. It could be 87 to 97. If we're doing well. Right? It might be 79 to 89. I don't know. But it would really be a very nuanced exploration of that topic. And I think until you do that, all of this other stuff is just abstract and kind of nonsense. Until a person can tell you what it is that they want to be doing in that last decade, you can't design a program to get them there. I mean, think about it. Someone wants to do an iron man. We take it for granted that we know what the objective is. I have to be able to swim two and a half miles. I have to be able to get out, take my wetsuit off, hop on my bike, ride 112 miles, get off my bike, take the bike shoes off, put the run shoes on, run 26.2 miles. We get it. We know what the objective is. And only by knowing that can you train.

Peter Attia: Can you imagine if I said to you, andrew, I'm going to have you do an athletic event in a year, start training. I'm not going to tell you what it is, just do it. It could be playing basketball, it could be swimming to Catalina Island, it could be running 100 miles. You wouldn't be able to do it. So similarly, if we don't know what our marginal decade is meant to be, there's no way to train for it.

Andrew Huberman: Do you think this is a good exercise for anyone and everyone to do on their own, regardless of age? Here I'm hearing this and I'm thinking, I need to think about when my last decade might be and what I want that to look like.

Peter Attia: Absolutely. I mean, when I say we do it with our patients, that's only because that's the population I work with. But there's simply no reason everybody shouldn't be going through this exercise.

Andrew Huberman: And then you sort of backscript from there, figure out what people should be doing given their current health status.
Andrew Huberman: You mentioned falling and the problems with falling and breaking things and mortality related to that. I wonder whether or not there are also healthspan related effects of just having weak bones that are not just about falling and breaking a bone and dying a year later, even though that's obviously very severe. Because I think when people hear about that, some people might think, well, I'll just be more careful. I just move more slowly. I'll sit in a wheelchair if I need to, even though I might be able to walk if it keeps me from falling. Some people, I think, adopt that mentality. What are some of the benefits of having high bone mineral density for men and women that are perhaps independent of risk of injury?

Peter Attia: Well, I think it's actually the inverse of what you just said. Right? It's sort of like you have to sort of be able to articulate what it is you want in your marginal decade. So we use this thing in our practice called the marginal decade. Marginal decade is the last decade of your life. So everyone will have a marginal decade. That's the only thing I can tell you with absolute certainty. Right.

Andrew Huberman: I believe you.

Peter Attia: There's no immortality. There's no hidden elixir that's going to help us live to be whatever. I mean, we're all going to be in our last decade at some point. And outside of people who die suddenly or through an accident, most of us know when we're in that marginal decade. You might not know the day you enter it, but most people who are old enough, if you tell them, are you in the last decade of your life? They probably have a sense that they are. So I think the exercise that we like to go through with our patients very early on is have them in exquisite detail, more detail than they've ever considered. So we have to prompt them with, like, 50 questions, lay out what their marginal decade should look like.

Andrew Huberman: Wow, that's a serious exercise.
Andrew Huberman: I highly recommend people check out Dr. Atia's podcast. The drive is excellent, as you can imagine, based on today's conversation, and it's easily available on Apple, Podcast, Spotify, Overcast, and Google. Please also check out Dr. Atia's website. It's Peteratiamd.com. There you can find links to his podcast episodes as well as a sign up for his excellent weekly newsletter. That newsletter provides terrific information related to health that anyone can benefit from. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a simple zero cost way to support us. Please also subscribe to the podcast on. Spotify and apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five star review. If you have questions or comments or suggestions about topics you'd like us to cover or guests you'd like us to interview on the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube.

Andrew Huberman: We do read all those comments, and we do take them to Heart. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's podcast, and check out Momentous Supplementation, our new partners in the supplement space. And check out athletic greens. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you're not already following us on social media, please do so. We Huberman Lab on Twitter and we are Huberman Lab on Instagram and both places I cover science and science related tools, some of which overlap with the content of the Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which is unique from the content covered on the Huberman Lab podcast.

Peter Attia: Again.

Andrew Huberman: That's Huberman lab on Instagram. Huberman lab on Twitter. Please also check out our Neural Network monthly newsletter. This is a newsletter that has summaries of podcast episodes. It also includes a lot of actionable protocols. It's very easy to sign up for the newsletter. You go to Huberman Lab, click on the menu, go to newsletter, you supply your email, but we do not share your email with anybody. We have a very clear and rigorous privacy policy, which is we do not share your email with anybody. And the newsletter comes out once a month and it is completely zero cost. Again, just go to Huberman Lab and go to the Neural Network newsletter. I'd also like to point out that Huberman Lab podcast has a clips channel. So these are brief clips anywhere from three to ten minutes that encompass single concepts and actionable protocols related to sleep.

Andrew Huberman: To focus interviews with various guests, we talk about things like caffeine, when to drink, caffeine relative to sleep, alcohol, when and how and if anyone should ingest it relative to sleep, dopamine serotonin, mental health, physical health, and on and on. All the things that relate to the topics most of interest to you. You can find that easily by going to YouTube. Look for Huberman Lab clips in the search area. It will take you there subscribe, and we are constantly updating those with new clips. This is especially useful, I believe, for people that have missed some of the earlier episodes, or you're still working through the back catalog of Huberman Lab podcasts, which admittedly can be rather long. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science.
Peter Attia: Yes. And we've also seen on the flip side of that, you can cheat through semiglutide, right. People who, you know, you can drink a lot of calories and sort of get around the drug. So, for example, we always encourage patients who want to lose weight to really just eliminate alcohol. That's the cheapest, easiest trick to lose weight. And so if you're still drinking a lot of alcohol, which is incredibly caloric and just drinking a lot of caloric stuff, we've seen that that's less this is just anecdotal with our patients, but we've seen that it's easier to get around the benefits of the drug that way.

Andrew Huberman: Interesting. I so appreciate your answers today. First of all, they were incredibly thorough and pointed towards real world application. I also just want to thank you more broadly for the work that you do, because obviously you have this incredible clinical experience and patient population that you work very closely with. But I see you really as one of the few, both clinicians, and I realize you're an MD. Did you do a PhD as well? No. But I consider you a scientist clinician. Clinician scientist is the appropriate wording of that, of course, in the way that you really still drill into studies in detail. I know a lot of clinicians, not all of them do, that for sure. And the fact that you're so hungry for the new incoming knowledge as well as the old literature. So it's an incredibly rich data set in that brain of yours. And I really appreciate you sharing it with us both in your podcast, in the upcoming book, which I think that we'll certainly have you on here again in anticipation of that. But I know I and a ton of other people are really excited for the book and in the way that you approach social media and your podcast and going on podcast.

Andrew Huberman: Thank you so much. I learned a ton. I know everyone learned a ton.

Peter Attia: Thanks, Andrew. Great to be here, man.

Andrew Huberman: Thank you. Thank you for joining me today for my discussion with Dr. Peter Attia all about the things that we can do in order to maximize our lifespan and health span.
Peter Attia: Again, I think in terms of actual comparing it in a placebo, no effect whatsoever. Right. So does that mean that you put a patient on it, they won't complain of something? No. But if you look at clinical trials, there's no evidence whatsoever that statins impair cognition. There's also no evidence in clinical trials that they accelerate the risk of neurodegenerative disease. In fact, it's the opposite. Now, there's a very nuanced case we make, Andrew, which is we'll look at patients with highly suppressed desmol levels, we will back off. We do want to maintain Desmond above a certain level because of some evidence that is still, I think, very preliminary but enough for us that we say, why take the chance? We have so many other tools to lower cholesterol. Why would we over suppress synthesis in a susceptible individual? So the next tool you look at is a drug that blocks the absorption or the reabsorption of cholesterol. Remember that neiman pixie one like one transporter. So that guy has a drug called Azetamib that just mechanically blocks it. And that's why I mentioned earlier we measure all those sterols in people, so we also measure things called phytosterols and the phytosterols give us an indication of how active that transporter is. So the higher your phytosterols, the more likely you are to respond to zetamide.

Peter Attia: Next class of drugs is a drug that blocks cholesterol synthesis, but only in the liver. So the statin does it globally. This other drug called bempidoic acid does it only in the liver. So it has a very similar mechanism to statins. Different enzyme, not quite as potent, but way fewer side effects. So any patient that's having a response to statins that's adverse will try this.

Andrew Huberman: Other thing, what's it called, one more time?

Peter Attia: Benpidoic acid.

Andrew Huberman: Benpidoic acid.
Peter Attia: Well, nutritionally, you basically have two big tools, right. And it depends on what's driving up apob. So apob, remember, is the concentration of LDL and VLDL particles. And what do they carry? Cholesterol and triglycerides. So anything that reduces cholesterol and reduces triglycerides is going to reduce apob. Triglycerides are generally driven by carbohydrate intake, so more insulin resistance, more carbohydrate intake, more triglycerides. Clinically, this is readily apparent to anyone who treats patients. If you restrict carbohydrates, you will reduce triglycerides. That just happens all day long. But if you reduce triglycerides by raising fat intake so much, it can still raise apob. So you have to be able to think about it. In an ideal world, it's can. You lower saturated fat, which tends to be the one that is most driving apob while lowering carbohydrate, and then see what you can get. But here's the reality of it.

Peter Attia: Is there's nobody with dietary intervention that's going to get to a level of 30 milligrams per deciliter. I've never seen any pure dietary intervention.

Andrew Huberman: Yeah, so what are the other things?

Peter Attia: It's got to be pharmacologic at this point.

Andrew Huberman: Statin type intervention.

Peter Attia: Well, now you have multiple classes of drugs, so the tried and true is the statin. So statins work by inhibiting cholesterol synthesis, and the net effect of that. Is that? So the liver is really sensitive to cholesterol levels. It doesn't want too much, it doesn't want too little. When you inhibit cholesterol synthesis, the liver says, I want more cholesterol. So it puts more LDL receptors on its surface and it pulls the LDL out of circulation. That's what lowers the LDL in the circulation. So again, nine statins in use today, we typically use four of them. The side effect profile, contrary to kind of all the sort of statin hating propaganda out there, very benign. Right. 5% of people experience muscle soreness which reverses upon cessation.

Andrew Huberman: Cognitive effects.
Andrew Huberman: I see. So for somebody who, let's say their total cholesterol is let's just stay with 200 for simplicity, what do you like to see in terms of the HDL LDL ratio?

Peter Attia: Couldn't care less. I only care about apob. I only care about apob. I care about the causative agent of atherosclerosis. Apob is the thing that drives atherosclerosis.

Andrew Huberman: And what levels are attractive or repulsive for you? When you see levels of apob that are blank, you get really concerned.

Peter Attia: It depends on the person's objectives. So, again, we take a very different view.

Andrew Huberman: I mean, we have vitality now, live to and I want to live to be 100.

Peter Attia: Yeah. Assuming some tape, if you tell me you want to live to be 100, you're going to need to keep your apob below 30 milligrams per deciliter.

Andrew Huberman: Let's say I want to live to be 100. Well, how about I don't care how long I live, but I want to feel great while I live?

Peter Attia: Again, it depends, right. Like anybody who's had a heart attack is going to be compromised in their ability to feel well after. Right.

Andrew Huberman: I guess I may say it that way, because if you're going to tell me that in order to achieve that live to 100 level, I'm going to have to give up my personal life and my no and my brain functioning, then I'm not really interested.

Peter Attia: Sure. But to get LDL levels, and really, again, people think of it as LDL, it's really apob. Right. Apob is this total concentration of LDL and VLDL, and that's what matters. Those are the big atherogenic particles. LDL also includes the LP Little A, although the concentration of LP little A is, relatively speaking, so small that it doesn't generally show up as much in the apob. So we treat apob, and basically what it comes down to is you want APO B to be as close to the level as it was when you were born. So we start developing heart disease when we're born. That's just the way it is. The autopsy studies make this abundantly clear when you look at autopsies of young people who are dying in their twenty s, and this was first done in the 1970s, it was again repeated again, it's always done after we have a war. Right. So in the 1970s, it was done on people who died in Vietnam. In the early 2000s, it was done on mostly young men, but some young women who were dying in Iraq and Afghanistan. And we saw without any ambiguity that cardiovascular disease is already taking hold in people who are 18 1920 years old.

Peter Attia: Wow. And to be clear, they aren't going to die of atherosclerosis at that age. They're still 40, 50 years away from it. But this is a lifelong disease, and we also know that the disease can't really develop until apob reaches a certain threshold. And that's the threshold that most of us get to by the time we're sort of in our teens. So it's this really young APO B level of kind of 20 to 30 milligrams per deciliter that makes it impossible to get atherosclerosis. So apob is necessary, but not sufficient to develop as CBD. Now that go ahead.

Andrew Huberman: I'm sorry, I was just going to ask what are some of the top behavioral nutritional supplementation, if any, based and prescription drug based ways to target apob?
Andrew Huberman: And while I think most people are familiar with the number of different variables associated with the resistance training, sets, reps, rest intervals, cadence, et cetera, there are also a tremendous number of very important variables for endurance in any kind of cardiovascular training. And there are a lot of excellent resources out there about that. I think the most important one, in fact I will go on record saying what I believe to be the most important variable for any endurance or cardiovascular training is that because it's a repetitive movement, that you are able to complete the movement safely, meaning you're not putting your body into range of motion or into positions that can damage joints or put you in any kind of compromised state. And some people might think, well, that seems kind of silly. But if you've ever set the, for instance, the seat too high on a stationary bike and then done Airdyne or assault bike type interval training sprints, if it's set too high and you're over-striding, as it were, the next day, you can really pay the price in terms of some back pain or sciatica. And sometimes that pain can extend for quite a while. So of course you don't want to approach any exercise with so much caution that it's neurotic and preventive and yet you don't want to approach any exercise in any way that's so cavalier, forgive the pun, Jeff, that you're also going to compromise the integrity of your joints and musculature and connective tissue.
Andrew Huberman: Welcome to the Huberman Lab guest series, where I and an expert guest discuss science and science based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today marks the second episode in the six episode series with Dr. Andy Galpin, a professor of kinesiology at Cal State University Fullerton, and one of the foremost world's experts on the science. Andy app applications of methods to increase strength, hypertrophy, and endurance. Today's episode is all about how to increase strength, speed, and hypertrophy of muscles. Professor Dr. Andy Galpin. Great to be back. Last episode, you told us about the nine specific adaptations that exercise can induce, everything from strength and hypertrophy to endurance, muscular endurance, so on and so forth. And you gave us this incredible toolkit of fit tests for each of those adaptations so that people can assess them for themselves and then, of course, improve on each andy every one of them if they choose.

Andrew Huberman: By the way, people can access that information simply by going to the first episode in this series with you. And it's all there Andy timestamped. And I highly recommend people do that. Today we're talking about strength and hypertrophy, Andy. So right out the gate, I just want to ask you, why should people think about Andy train for strength and hypertrophy? And that question is, of course, directed towards those that are trying to get stronger and grow bigger muscles. But I know that many people out there perhaps have not thought about the benefits of strength and hypertrophy training and how beneficial it can be, not just for people that want to get bigger biceps, et cetera, but that have other goals, longevity goals and health goals unrelated to what most people associate with hypertrophy. So what are the benefits of training for strength and hypertrophy, for the everyday person, for the athlete, for the recreational exerciser and so on?
Andrew Huberman: I should just mention that catalog of supplements is constantly being updated. As mentioned at the beginning of today's episode, the Huberman Lab podcast has now launched a premium channel. That premium channel will feature monthly AMAs or ask me anythings where I answer your questions in depth as well as other premium resources. If you'd like to subscribe to the premium channel, you can simply go to hubermanlab.com/premium. I should mentioned that the proceeds from the premium channel go to support the standard Huberman Lab podcast, which will continue to be released every Monday per usual, as well as supporting various research projects done on humans to create the sorts of tools for mental health, physical health and performance that you hear about on the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's hubermanlab.com/premium to subscribe, it's $10 a month or $100 per year. If you haven't already subscribed to our zero cost newsletter, we have what is called the Neural Network Newsletter.

Andrew Huberman: You can subscribe by going to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu and click on newsletter. Those newsletters include summaries of podcast episodes, lists of tools from the Huberman Lab podcast. And if you'd like to see previous newsletters we've released, you can also just go to hubermanlab.com, click on newsletter in the menu, and you'll see various downloadable PDFs. If you want to sign up for the newsletter, we just ask for your email. We do not share your email with anybody. And again, it's completely zero cost. If you're not already following me on social media, it's hubermanlab on Twitter, on Facebook, and on Instagram. And at all three of those places, I cover topics and subject matter that are sometimes overlapping with the information covered on the Huberman Lab podcast, but that's often distinct from information on the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's hubermanlab on all social media channels. So thank you for joining me today for our discussion about building your optimal toolkit for fitness. And last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science.
Andrew Huberman: So thank you for joining me for this discussion of what I'm calling a foundational, or yes, we could even get bold and call it an optimal fitness protocol. Although the word optimal is a tricky one. There's no real optimal fitness protocol. And today what I've really tried to focus on is this foundational protocol because it does allow you to check off most, if not all the boxes related to strength, endurance, hypertrophy, speed, power, flexibility. It will also teach you how to regulate your nervous system up and down. That is to ramp up and focus, mind muscle link, et cetera, and then quickly calm down, physiological sighs, three to five minute decompress breathing at the end of training, et cetera.

Andrew Huberman: Really, even though I talked about the protocol that I follow, and again, that we will provide as a newsletter at hubermanlab.com if you want to look at it in more detail, even though we talked about it in the context of what I do, again, I really want to emphasize that this protocol and the description of this protocol and all its variables is really for you and for you to tailor to your specific needs. So please, take the protocol into consideration, but do not treat it as holy, treat it as a starting point from which you can adapt it to your specific fitness needs. If you're learning from and or enjoying the Huberman Lab podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the Huberman Lab podcast on Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you also have the opportunity to leave us up to a five star review.

Andrew Huberman: If you have questions for us or comments about the information we've covered or suggestions about future guests, please put those in the comments section on YouTube. We do read all the comments. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's episode. That's the best way to support the Huberman Lab podcast. Not so much today, but in many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab podcast, we talk about supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like enhancing sleep and focus and hormone optimization. The Huberman Lab podcast has partnered with Momentous Supplements. If you like to see the supplements of the Huberman Lab podcast has partnered with Momentous on, you can go to livemomentous, spelled O-U-S, so livemomentous.com/huberman. And there you'll see a number of the supplements that we talk about regularly on the podcast.
Andrew Huberman: Before we wrap up, I do want to emphasize one tool. It's a very easy, in fact, zero cost, very low time commitment tool. And this was one that was provided, again, by Dr. Andy Galpin when he was on the Huberman Lab podcast. And it's a tool that there is excellent research to support the effectiveness of, and that I do believe should come at the end of every training session. And that's to do three to five minutes of deliberately slowed breathing. It sounds so simple, three to five minutes of deliberately slowed breathing. So this could be while you're in the shower or when you arrive at your car, you might sit in your car quietly and do that if you have time or maybe even while you're driving back to, or onto your next destination, just to really slow down your breathing, to really look at the recovery period that has to follow each training session. And of course, during which the adaptations, the changes that make you more fit than you were going into the exercise occur. And that three to five minutes of deliberately slowed breathing has been shown in Andy's group and in related experiments, not exactly the same, but related experiments in our laboratory, in other laboratories, to really so-called downshift the nervous system and really set you up for maximal recovery, rapid recovery, and allow you to lean into the next training session with full intensity when that training session eventually arrives. So it's a very simple tool, but a very potent tool for your overall fitness.
Andrew Huberman: Earlier we talked about whether or not to train if you're sleep deprived and how to recover from what I would say is moderate sleep deprivation by doing NSDR as opposed to total sleep deprivation like being up all night or having a truly miserable night, which case, I think you should just skip training the next day and slide it forward. Now, a similar issue comes up from time to time where people wonder whether or not they should train or not if they're sick. And here there's all sorts of crazy gym lore and sport specific lore. For instance, I used to hear this, when I ran cross country, there was this adage that if the symptoms were from the neck up, you could still train. That is if you were really congested and you had a headache, you could still run. Whereas if it was in your chest and in your lungs you couldn't run. I don't think there's any data whatsoever to support whether or not that's true or whether it's not true.

Andrew Huberman: For myself, and because my general goal is to be training and fit over time, but also to include general health in the fitness equation, that is to not be sick or chronically sick and certainly not to get other people sick. If I have a little tiny sniffle, like I think I might be getting sick, even then, I'm a little cautious in the sense that I'm not going to do my typical workout. I might stop at about 15 minutes earlier. And I would do that not by neglecting any body parts or anything of that sort. If it's a weight training workout, by simply reducing the total number of sets, I probably wouldn't do any sets to failure, if I did, I might reduce the total number or percentage of sets to failure from about 30% of sets to maybe closer to 10% of sets, something like that. And if it was endurance work, I might throttle back by 10 or 20%. And I will shorten the total duration of the workout. And I often find that because of the known, yes, peer reviewed known immune system enhancing effects of exercise, sometimes that alone will allow me to avoid getting sick. But of course I'm also careful to get home, take a hot shower, not stress myself out, if I can avoid getting myself stressed out and focus on sleep, NSDR, other forms of recovery, good nutrition, et cetera.

Andrew Huberman: If however, I have a real sniffle, a cold, I'm not feeling well or I think I might be coming down with a flu, I absolutely do not train and I don't get back into training of any kind until I'm completely recovered. So what I'm basically saying is that, no, I don't believe you should train if you're sick. And perhaps equally importantly, when you come back from a layoff of any kind, whether or not because of illness or for whatever reason, I do believe that because your body is a bit untrained, it's not ideal to jump right back into maximal training and to take one, maybe two weeks of ramping up to the full duration and intensity of workouts that then I would continue on going for however many cycles I can complete before I hit another sickness or I hit another gap in my schedule due to family obligations or other obligations, et cetera. So we've covered a lot of tools and protocols and variables related to fitness, but we have by no means covered all the available tools and protocols and variables.
Andrew Huberman: Now the relax into the stretch is something has been talked about in martial arts circles and Pavel Tsatsouline has an excellent book on stretching, we can provide a link to that, talks about this, has a lot to do with relaxation of the nervous system and the way that the nerves innervate muscles and allow for stretch, if you will. Also, the way that the tendons and ligaments are innervated by nerves. The converse is also true. And here, again, this is a principle that Pavel has put forth, I believe he calls it irradiation, meaning irradiating out or emanating out from a source, which is that while exhaling and relaxing the torso, the midsection, some people call it the core, although some people don't like that term, can facilitate relaxation and stretching through a larger range of motion. So too can contracting the core, the midsection, or gripping very tightly with the fist can facilitate muscular contraction because of the way that the nervous system heavily, we can even say over-represents the fists in the brain. And so how would you apply this to your overall foundational fitness protocol?

Andrew Huberman: Well, it turns out that, let's say, you're doing a movement that involves one limb moving and then the other, let's say it's bicep curls, just for sake of example, turns out that you will actually be stronger in moving that dumbbell with the arm that happens to be moving if you grip the handle very tightly, but also grip the handle of the opposite dumbbell very tightly. Now that said, in between sets, I encourage you to do the opposite. To try and completely relax in between sets, combine that with the physiological sigh, and then when the set, the next set commences, employ that very strong grip, both, again, of the weight that's moving and the weight that at that moment might be stationary or in isometric position. So the nervous system, of course, is what controls muscles and that operates in both directions. If you want to relax, try and use long exhales, maybe even physiological sighs and really concentrate on mentally and physically relaxing, in particular your core and your fists. And if you want to generate force, right, you want to move a heavy barbell or dumbbell, you want to do a chin up with the maximal force, that's when you can employ the opposite, which would be to grip the bar or dumbbell, et cetera, very tightly. And you want to contract your core or even fill your body with air as a, say, plug all the leaks, et cetera. So this gets into kind of form and movement, which is an extensive near infinite landscape of discussion, again, that we don't have time to go into.

Andrew Huberman: I just want to mention those two nervous system related tips because I suppose as a neuroscientist, they appeal to me because they're grounded in fundamental principles of how the nervous system innervates muscle. And I know that they will benefit you the first time you use them and every time.
Andrew Huberman: We haven't talked so much about flexibility yet, but we did an entire episode of the Huberman Lab podcast on flexibility and I encourage you to check out that episode if you're interested in increasing your flexibility. But the basic takeaway from that episode is that if you look at what I like to call the center of mass of the research, that is most of the studies and what the conclusions of most of the quality studies point to, so not the exceptions, but the kind of general rules that have been gleaned over time from multiple labs over multiple decades, et cetera. What you find is that static stretching, that is, holding a stretch and in fact exhaling and relaxing the midsection and torso and relaxing into the stretch as opposed to staying full of air and tense, but mentally and physically relaxing into the stretch, but not stretching maximally, that is not extending as far as you possibly can go, but more like 60% or even less. And then holding those static stretches for anywhere from 30 to 60 seconds and then repeating, doing that two or three times throughout the week for multiple muscle groups, so it could be for your quadriceps, could be for hamstrings, for your lats.

Andrew Huberman: There are protocols out there. In fact, we have a newsletter that is focused entirely on protocols for flexibility and stretching. You can find that again by going hubermanlab.com. You don't even need to sign up for the newsletter, although we invite you to if you like, but you can simply go there, scroll down to the flexibility newsletter and all the protocols are there for each of the muscle groups, et cetera. But what I typically try and do is some stretching in the evening, because I train in the morning, as I'm perhaps getting ready for bed or if the TV is on, which in our house doesn't typically go on because we don't have a TV, but of course there are computers and people are on their computers, et cetera. Well, I'll try and do some stretching while I do that.

Andrew Huberman: I also have a standing desk, so during the day at work, regardless of whether or not I train that morning or not, or I'm going to train in the afternoon, I'll try and do some static stretching for my hamstrings, my quads, my lats, my shoulders, my back, really doesn't take much time and I really try to space that out throughout the week, which, if you look at the peer reviewed research, matches well to what's known to be most effective, which are going to be short, repeated sessions ideally every day. But truth told, I fail. I categorically fail. I was about to think of whether or not I ever stretch every day. I fail to do it every day, but I get about three or so stretching sessions in per week. And again, it's just static hold, trying to really relax into the stretch.
Andrew Huberman: And then I don't have to skip a workout entirely just because I didn't get a good night's sleep. A lot of people ask whether or not you should train fasted or fed, and this is a very controversial area. I personally prefer to do my cardiovascular work not having eaten anything in the previous 3 to 10 hours. And typically that's because I wake up and I'll do the cardiovascular training within about an hour of waking up, sometimes later, because my first meal generally falls, generally, not always, falls around 11:00 AM. I don't do any kind of formal intermittent fasting, but typically my meal schedule somewhere between 11:00 a.m. and my last bite of food is around 8:00 p.m. but I'm not super strict about that. I might eat in as late as 9:00 p.m. and I might eat something at 10:00 a.m. if I wake up really hungry, I might have something before 11:00 a.m., I'm not neurotic about it. But in terms of training, I like to train fasted and that includes the resistance training workouts and those come early in the day for me. And typically if I'm going to train legs on Monday, for instance, which is when I train legs, I'll make sure that the night before I'm ingesting some starch, some carbohydrate, like rice or pasta or something of that sort to make sure that when I do that morning leg workout, I have enough glycogen in the muscles, et cetera. Again, nutrition is a somewhat controversial area.

Andrew Huberman: In fact, it can evoke very strong feelings 'cause I know we've got vegans and we've got omnivores and we've got carnivores and people who are keto. This isn't really the format for us to get into all of that. I think the rule to follow is figure out what optimizes your training for your particular training goals. For me, that most often means training fasted and then eating pretty soon after I train. And if it's a high intensity resistance training workout, and frankly, all of my resistance training workouts are pretty high intensity, I'm not going to failure on every set, but at least, say, about 30% of those sets I'm going to failure. And the other sets I'm working very hard nonetheless, well then I eat some starches after I train and I also ingest some protein in the form of a protein drink or a meal that includes some protein food. But I don't like to eat before I do resistance training or at least not within the hour or two before I do resistance training.

Andrew Huberman: There are exceptions to that, and I should say that the same basically applies to endurance work. If I'm going to head out for a run, typically I don't want my belly full of food or any food at all, but there are times where I wake up hungry and I very much need to eat something or I have something scheduled socially like a breakfast and I'll have that breakfast and then an hour or 90 minutes later I'll do my workout because I want to make sure that I finish the workout. I, again, am not neurotically attached to training fasted or fed. For me, fasted is preferred, but if I have to train fed, better to train than to not train at all.
Andrew Huberman: Let's talk about some real world practical variables. For instance, let's say you get a poor to terrible night's sleep. Should you train the next day or not? Well, that really depends. I can honestly say I've had some of the best training sessions, resistance training or endurance training sessions after a really poor night's sleep. But that's the rare event. More often than not, if I'm not sleeping well, I've had a terrible night's sleep, the next day I will just skip training that day. I know that will shock a number of you out there, or perhaps you're already calling me names, weak, et cetera. But I find that if I've slept really poorly or I've had a very stressful event the day before and I don't sleep well, training the next day sets me up for getting ill and getting ill sets me up for not being able to train for multiple days. So it is my preference in that case to skip a day and really focus on recovery. And then, as I mentioned earlier, slide that workout to the next day and rarely double that workout up with another workout, but then just slide the schedule forward by a day. But I really try and strive, that is, I really try to double up at least some workouts later in the week in that case, so that I can get back on schedule of starting the seven day protocol again on the same day.

Andrew Huberman: I don't want to be excessively vague there. What I'm trying to say is I try and adhere to the same schedule, but if I get a poor night's sleep, I'll just simply skip the workout the next day, slide the workout forward. There is one exception to that, and it's an important exception, which is there are times when I've not slept well or I've had some particularly stressful event the day before and haven't slept well, but I'm able to do so-called NSDR, non-sleep deep rest the next day. So there have been times when I've only got three or four hours of sleep the night before and I'm feeling really behind the ball the next morning, but I really want to get my workout in. So instead what I will do is a 10, but ideally in that case a 30 or even 60 minute non-sleep deep rest. And there's a 10 minute non-sleep deep breath protocol read by me. But it is a non-spiritual, non-mystical, science-supported non-sleep deep breath protocol available on YouTube.

Andrew Huberman: You can simply put my name, Huberman, put NSDR, and Virtusan, V-I-R-T-U-S-A-N, into YouTube and you'll find that script. There are other NSDR scripts that you can find now on Spotify and on YouTube. And if you fall asleep during those non-sleep deep rest scripts, that's great. And if you don't, you will also find that it will restore your ability to perform mental and physical work. So there are times when I haven't gotten as much sleep as I would like, or I'm feeling a bit more stressed for whatever reason, and I'll do NSDR, and then I will go train. And that often works fabulously well for me.
Andy Galpin: You cannot get that through any other form of exercise besides heavy overload strength training. And we can walk through in detail what that is, but that is reason number one. In general, human movement is a function of number one, some sort of neuromuscular activation. So nerves have to turn on. The second part is muscles have to contract. And the third part is those muscles have to move a bone. All right? If you want to be alive and you want to live by yourself, you have to be able to engage in human movement. If you have any dysfunction in the neuromuscular system there, then you're not going to be able to do that. And again, as I mentioned, the only way to preserve that or fight that loss of aging is to strength training. So people will tend to hear numbers like you lose about 1% of muscle size per year after age about 40. And that's true. However, what they don't realize is you lose about two to 4% of your strength per year. So the loss of strength is almost double that.

Andy Galpin: The loss of muscle mass. With aging, muscle power is more like eight to 10% per year. And so we can very clearly see the problem you're going to have with aging is not going to be preservation of muscle, although that is incredibly important. It's going to be very specifically preservation of muscle power and strength. And why that really matters is your ability to, again, stand up and move, your ability to catch yourself from a fall, your ability to feel confident doing a movement that is a function of muscle power more than it is muscle size. Andy so functionality is really what we want to be, right? You want to be able to do whatever you want to do physically and feel confident in doing that as you age. That's going to only be obtained through strength training.

Andrew Huberman: So is it appropriate to say that training for strength and hypertrophy is also a way to keep your nervous system healthy and young?

Andy Galpin: Yeah, absolutely. It is the only exercise route we have for that. If you look at just basic numbers like motor units, you're going to see that older individuals have like a 30% to 40% reduction in total motor units.

Andrew Huberman: So when you say older, approximately what ages are you referring to? Because I know many people out there, such as myself, are 40 and older, but I know many of our listeners are in their 20s, maybe even in their teens. Andy I can imagine that people that start doing strength andy hypertrophy training younger will afford themselves an advantage over time, but that everybody should be doing strength and hypertrophy training for as much of their lifespan as possible. That's really the message that I'm getting. So if somebody is, for instance, 45, would that fall into the bin of older?
Andrew Huberman: Now that said, I do realize that some people might be hyper focused on things like strength and hypertrophy and the aesthetics that come with it. A key point about strength hypertrophy and weight training, and this is something that has been covered on multiple podcasts, certainly the one with Jeff Cavaliere and with Dr. Andy Galpin and the one that I did on building muscle strength and hypertrophy, the solo episode. And that is the following, it is the rare individual who has perfectly balanced musculature, right? Most people can be a bit quad dominant or hamstring dominant, or they have trouble activating their glutes or somebody has a terrible time trying to activate their chest muscles, but they're very strong in the back, et cetera. It's very clear that we can know that not just based on aesthetics, right, but based on deliberate contractibility of those muscles. So I don't want to get into this in too much detail for sake of time, but this is something that has peer reviewed research to support it and was also discussed extensively with Jeff Cavaliere when he was a guest. And that actually he's really popularized this notion and it's absolutely true, which is that if you can contract a muscle very hard to the point where it almost feels like it's cramping, if you can do that even when there's no weight in your hand or there's no resistance against it, so you're just using your mind muscle connection to contract that muscle hard and isolate it, chances are you'll be able to generate hypertrophy and strength gains pretty easily in that muscle compared to muscles that you have a harder time activating. So during all resistance training, that mind muscle link is really important, so much so that some people will even try and emphasize contraction of the muscles in between sets, et cetera.

Andrew Huberman: I personally, because I'm not somebody who likes a mirror when I work out, and I'm not somebody who wants to spend time in between sets flexing muscles and et cetera for whatever reason, I want to actually rest between sets, and I'm more concerned with performance during those sets and really putting my mind into the muscle during the set, I really try and emphasize deep relaxation between sets. And so here's a tool that again is built out of science and I should say peer reviewed studies, some of which are being done in my lab, but other labs as well, which is that in between sets what I really strive to do is to bring my heart rate down as much as possible, calm myself down as much as possible, and I'll do the so-called physiological sigh in order to do that. That's two inhales through the nose, back to back, and then long full exhale through the mouth. I just did it partially there for the sake of time, again. So a big deep inhale through the nose and then sneak in a little bit more on a second inhale to maximally inflate the lungs and the alveoli in the lungs, and then a full exhale of all your air via the mouth to empty your lungs.

Andrew Huberman: That's the fastest way that we are aware of to calm your nervous system down. And really, in between sets you can use that to calm yourself down and conserve energy. But then as you move into the weight training set, you really want to ratchet up your focus and attention to the muscles that you're going to be using. Now, I'd like to acknowledge that there's a huge range of parameters in terms of how to actually perform during the set. You can focus on a particular muscle and try and really isolate from the beginning of the movement. Some people will really try and isolate it only during the peak contraction. Some people accentuate the negative. There's speed and cadence. There are, again, remember, concepts are few, methods are many. And if you're interested in the various methods of eccentrics and concentrics and all the different ways of changing up cadence and so forth during sets, there's an enormous amount of quality information out there, far too much for us to get into detail now. But what I describe the general principles of how to set your mind, if you will, during the set, you should be focused on the muscles that you're using and or moving the weight.

Andrew Huberman: If movement of the weight is more important, you can either focus on moving the weight or challenging muscles, right? You can either try and isolate muscles and make specific muscles do the work or simply moving the weight. Moving the weight is going to be more geared towards strength improvements, but focusing on the muscle, so called mind muscle link is going to shift that very same set more toward hypertrophy. I realize I'm painting with a broad brush here, but nonetheless this is grounded in the way that the nervous system governs muscular contraction.
Andrew Huberman: So we've completed the total arc across the week and we can summarize it as saying Sunday is, let's just say long endurance, Monday is leg resistance training, Tuesday, heat cold contrast, Wednesday, torso training plus neck, Thursday, I would call it moderate intensity cardiovascular exercise, so that 35 minute moderate intensity cardiovascular exercise, Friday, high intensity interval training of sprinting or some variation thereof and Saturday, arms, calves, neck and torso, indirect work. That's the total structure. But I want to emphasize again, you do not need to start this on Sunday. That is, you could make the long endurance work start on Tuesday and then just fill in the rest as described before. It's really up to you. There's another important point I want to make, which is that neither I nor anyone is going to be successful in doing the exact workouts on the exact same days of every week because of travel, work, illness, other demands, et cetera.

Andrew Huberman: The thing about the schedule that I like so much that I do believe that will benefit you as well is that you have some flexibility there. What's the flexibility? Well, let's say you train your typical Sunday workout of endurance, then you train legs on Monday and then you don't manage to do your heat cold contrast on Tuesday for whatever reason. Well, you can put it on Wednesday. Just make sure that if you're going to do the cold stimulus, that you don't do it too close, not within four, ideally eight hours after the training of torso, but you could do it before or you could do it just heat and skip the cold that particular week, right? Not ideal, but better than not doing anything. Let's say, for instance, the leg workout was particularly brutal, you don't sleep that well on Monday night or Tuesday night. Well then should you do the torso workout on Wednesday?

Andrew Huberman: Well, I would say, why not move the heat cold contrast to Wednesday and then push that torso workout to Thursday and maybe also try and do that 35 minute run on Thursday every once in a while rather than lose the total control of the program and let everything shuffle forward. Here's the basic principle. I do believe that any one of these workouts, whether it's for endurance or resistance training, can be shifted either one day forward or one day back, right? You could delay it by a day or you could accelerate it by a day in order to make sure that you get everything done across the week.

Andrew Huberman: In fact, I would say the best way to think about this foundational fitness program is not from the details up, but from the top down, from the big picture down to the details, and say to yourself, once a week you're going to get some long endurance in, another day during the week, you're going to make sure that you get a kind of moderate faster endurance workout in, and then one other day during the week, you're going to get an all out sprint, high intensity cardiovascular exercise workout in. You're going to get those three workouts in somehow. And then in addition to that, you will also do resistance training for every muscle group in your body. And that means doing your legs hard at least once a week, your torso hard at least once a week and your arms hard at least once a week. And of course you are also paying attention to training your calves. And I do, for reasons I described before, believe that you want to train your neck at least to keep it strong.

Andrew Huberman: You may not want to generate hypertrophy there. People vary in terms of how quickly their neck grows. Some people grows very, very fast. Other people, for the life of them, they can't get much hypertrophy in their neck. But keeping that neck strong, at least through some very light work to moderate weight work, very, very important, for reasons I stated earlier. If you set out those goals, then the specific days that you do each workout isn't as critical, but the specific spacing is. So for instance, you're not going to want to do your high intensity interval training the day after you train your legs, because if you're doing that high intensity interval training correctly, you're going to be taxing your legs and eating into their recovery. And so you want to space them out by two or three days. So I think you'll notice that the point is really to optimize everything on the whole rather than any one specific aspect of training or adaptation.
Andrew Huberman: So we've covered Sunday through Friday, and then Saturday rolls around and Saturday is when you train arms, calves, and neck. So this may sound as if you're training a bunch of small muscle groups, biceps, triceps, necks and calves, and that's true, but I should mention that you are also training your torso a second time and you're doing it indirectly, or sometimes not indirectly. Why do I say this? Well, keep in mind, again, that for strength and hypertrophy, you're going for that once about every 48 to 72 hours, you want to stimulate that, on Wednesday is when you train your torso, right? Chest, shoulders, back and neck. You've had Thursday to rest, Friday to rest. I know a lot of people are going to want to emphasize those body parts and they're going to think, oh, you have to train it twice a week. But if you have modest recovery ability or low recovery ability, such as I do, and you're doing these other cardiovascular training sessions, et cetera, well then, on Saturday is when you will train arms, calves and neck directly. But included in that, remember, two exercises per muscle group, one with a peak contraction, one with somewhat of a stretch in there.

Andrew Huberman: Included in that, I suggest doing some sort of dip movement, which I think it was Pavel Tsatsouline said the dip is synonymous with or at least similar to an upper body squat. Excuse me, Pavel if I got that wrong. Maybe it wasn't you that said that, but big admirer of his work, and certainly the dip is a great exercise to hit multiple muscle groups, chest, shoulders, and triceps, maybe even some back to some extent depending on how you do it. So doing some dipping movement will indirectly stimulate strength hypertrophy, et cetera, in the chest and shoulders and including some sort of pulling movement for the bicep, like a chin up or palms facing movement, pulling up from to the bar, especially if it's a close grip type movement. But even if it's a wide grip type movement, will of course trigger strength and hypertrophy, maintenance or improvements in the biceps, but will also trigger strength hypertrophy in the lats in the back.

Andrew Huberman: Okay, so Saturday is this arm workout that I'll just give an example of a potential workout where you might do a few more exercises and maybe not just two, but maybe three to make sure you get the torso indirect stimulation. So what would this look like? Well, this might be your sort of classic dumbbell curls for the bicep and maybe incline curl for the bicep because it has more of a stretch on an incline bench, and then you might finish with two sets of chin ups. So palms facing you, chin ups, or three sets of chin-ups depending on whether or not you're in a heavier load month or a more moderate weight month. Again, activating the biceps muscles 'cause arms day, but also activating strength and hypertrophy in the lats or at least maintaining it so that, because you're not training those torso muscles again until Wednesday, you're not allowing the hypertrophy and strength gains that you generated on Wednesday to atrophy, to disappear.

Andrew Huberman: Then, thinking about triceps, it might be some sort of triceps isolation or peak contraction movement. So that could be tricep kickback or some overhead extension would be more of a stretch type movement than a kickback. But then also doing regular old dips. You might even start with dips, which again, are going to activate those torso muscles and the triceps. And then calf work in the same way that you did on Monday. And neck work... Again, I am a believer in training neck multiple times per week. And if you are able to finish all of that in 45 or 50 minutes, great. Most people will find when you're doing a lot of small muscle groups, it actually takes longer because you have to go around to more exercises. But again, just adhere to the same principles we talked about before, about 50, five zero, to 60 minutes of real work after a warmup with an asterisk next to that, that if someone's on the equipment or you can't find the dumbbells you need, et cetera, then maybe 75 minutes max. But really trying to not extend that workout too long, making sure that you activate the arms directly, but also activating the torso muscles indirectly, and again, I won't repeat it this time, again, but following the same weight and repetition and rest interval scheme that we talked about earlier, a bit heavier, lower reps, more sets and longer rest for about a month. And then alternating to more repetitions yet fewer sets, right?

Andrew Huberman: Shorter rest intervals and do that for about a month. This carries through for all the resistance training workouts regardless of the day of the week.
Andrew Huberman: That's simply not the case. But you're going to trigger strength and hypertrophy and other types of adaptations in those muscle groups. So this for me also represents the second leg workout of the week where I'm not touching any weights. One important point that I don't think I've heard mentioned anywhere else, but that I hope to have Dr. Kelly Starrett on the podcast to discuss and that I've discussed with him one on one, which is be careful with all out sprints or all out anything cardiovascular exercise, you can get injured doing those. So for instance, if you go out and you just sprint across a field, all out, 20 or 30 seconds and then walk back and can do it again and again, don't be surprised if the next day you have some sciatica or even some pelvic floor pain. I don't recommend going all out on any movement that you can't perform with perfect form. Okay? So for me, I really try and stay away from all out sprints.

Andrew Huberman: I'll sprint it about 95% of what I can do because I find if I go all out sprint, I don't know what the reason is, but it might be an over extension of a limb or something like that, I'm not a sprinter, I'm not a sprinting coach. I do hope to get Stu McMillan on here or Dan Pfaff, who are excellent sprinting coaches, at some point they were world class sprinting coaches, but I'm not a pro sprinter, I'm not even a amateur sprinter, I'm a fitness sprinter. So the Airdyne or assault bike or the rower is really a safer option for me. And if I'm running or I'm doing some sort of movement where I'm unconstrained, really, in terms of how far my stride is, I mean I'm obviously constrained by the musculature, I'm really careful to not overextend or do something like that. And the only way to do that is to not go all out. So again, the goal for this Friday workout is to really get the heart rate high, do high intensity interval training... A number of different ways you could do that.

Andrew Huberman: You can look up HIIT, HIIT workouts online, find the one that's best for you and really pick something that's safe that you can do consistently, and I believe that ideally will also trigger a bit of either strength and hypertrophy and speed power maintenance or even give you a little bit of a stimulus so that by the time you roll around to that leg workout on, again, on Monday, you've got a little bit of an additional boost to your leg strength, hypertrophy, speed and power.
Andrew Huberman: Now what is your maximum heart rate? Do you need a heart rate monitor? No. If you like using that sort of thing, great. But again, Andy Galpin beautifully supplied us with the information. He said if you take the number 220 and you subtract your age, that for most people, most, is going to be your maximum heart rate. Although for certain people who are very fit or certain ages, that's not going to apply. So it's a little bit too crude to measure, but it's a good starting place and you can look up other information or see that podcast episode, we provide the link to it in the show note captions if you want to get more details on that. I don't use a heart rate monitor. What I'm trying to do is get to that point where I quote unquote feel like I want to die. Now I don't want to die, and please don't die, right? If you're not in good cardiovascular health, do not just jump right into this fitness protocol. But I want to get to the point where I really feel like I could not pedal any faster or pull any faster on the assault bike, the Airdyne bike, or if I'm doing this workout in a place or at a time or because I choose to not use a bike or a rower, 'cause you could also use a rower, I will simply do sprint jog intervals.

Andrew Huberman: I will sprint for 20 or 30 seconds, then jog for 10 seconds, sprint for 20 or 30 seconds, and then jog for 10 seconds and just repeat. I used to have a big field next to my laboratory, my old laboratory, and I used to bring my bulldog Costello out there. He was really good at the first sprint part and then he would just lie down and watch. he didn't even do the jog part. I would just go back and forth, back and forth, back and forth, panting like a bulldog nonstop, barely able to recover before sprinting again. And the basis of this workout again is several fold. First of all, it's to get the heart rate really high, up towards maximum heart rate at least once a week. So you accomplish that this Friday. Also, if you are sprinting and then jogging or you are really pushing hard on an assault bike or an Airdyne bike, or using a, for instance, a skier or a skier machine or any number of different cardiovascular training tools, you are going to get activation of the legs, of course not to the same degree as you would with squats or dead lifts or leg extensions or leg curls.
Andrew Huberman: Okay, so with that Thursday cardiovascular, let's call it endurance, but cardiovascular training workout done, around roles Friday and on Friday I'm going to do another cardiovascular training session, and I alluded to this earlier, but this cardiovascular training session is also designed to tap into some of the ability of hard, I should say high intensity interval training, to tap into strength and hypertrophy increases for the legs. 'Cause remember, we train legs on Monday and what the science tells us is that protein synthesis in a muscle group can be stimulated about every 42 to 72 hours. And so we've had Tuesday off, Wednesday off and Thursday off and you don't want to lose progress that you made from that terrific Monday leg workout. But in order to make sure that you can do the other things that follow in this program and pick back up on Monday with another leg workout, at least for me with my recovery abilities and my work schedule, I'm not going to do an entire other leg workout because it's going to set the whole thing out of whack.

Andrew Huberman: That is, I won't be able to consistently do the same workouts on the same days of each week. Now with that said, a little bit later I'll explain what happens if you have to miss a workout and how you can combine days, et cetera. But I really strive to get certain workouts done on certain days consistently at least as best I can. So Friday is high intensity interval training, and that can take a variety of different forms. For me, the ideal thing to do, for me, again, you could do something completely different. Exercise choice, again, should be governed by what you can do safely so you don't injure yourself and that you can perform effectively and that gets you or provides you the stimulus that you want. And what I'm trying to do on Friday is get my heart rate way, way up. Talked about this in the episode with Dr. Andy Galpin.

Andrew Huberman: In addition to the benefits of getting 180-200 minutes of zone two cardio per week, minimum, it's a really good idea to get up to that max or near max heart rate at least once a week. And you're not going to do that for very long periods of time. You're not going to do that for 30 minutes. You can't sprint all out for 30 minutes unless you're Steve Prefontaine. If you haven't seen the movies "Without Limits" or "Prefontaine," you should absolutely see those. He was able to go out and run 12 laps, what seemed to be an all out sprint or close to it. Incredible. But most people are not going to do that or going be carried away on a stretcher if they try. These high intensity interval training for me ideally would be on so-called assault bike or Airdyne bikes. So these bikes that have the fan, which might seem like, oh, just cools you off, but actually there's a lot of resistance there. So what I will typically do is a 20 to 30 second all out sprint using arms and legs and then 10 seconds rest and then repeat all out sprint for 20 to 30 seconds, 10 seconds rest, repeat. And I'll do that for anywhere from 8 to 12 rounds, which, trust me, even if you start out a little bit less, or I should say not all out intensity or effort, by the time you hit the fifth or sixth one, you will be certainly headed into if not near your maximum heart rate.
Andrew Huberman: I also sometimes will travel with a jump rope. I always try and travel with a jump rope and skip rope, much to the dismay of the people who are housed below me in the hotel room. Skipping rope, I should mention, can be a very effective way of getting cardiovascular training while you're on the road. But in all seriousness, if you're in a hotel room or an apartment and you can't really jump high and you're very good at jumping rope, what you'll find is it's not going to get you into that higher elevated heart rate zone. Okay? It can be great for zone two type training, but if you're really good at skipping rope, and I wouldn't say I'm really good at it, but I've done enough skipping rope that I can just kind of cruise and talk and it, it's more zone twoish, even feels like walking at times. Now you can do double unders where you're really jumping and putting the rope under you twice each time or crossovers, et cetera, depending on your skill level. But again, if you're in an apartment or you're in a hotel, that's going to be harder to do. And because there's some skill involved, sometimes you're stopping more often than you're continuing.

Andrew Huberman: By the way, and I just have to mention this, a really terrific Instagram channel is @anna.skips. This is a teacher, a science teacher, or I believe it's a math, maths as they say in the UK 'cause she's in the UK, maths teacher. I don't know Anna, but I know she skips 'cause she has this amazing Instagram channel called Anna Skips. And what's really cool about her Instagram is she shows you her progression from not being able to skip rope at all to the absolutely incredible types of rope skipping that she's doing each morning while getting sunlight, which of course is essential health protocol. So check out Anna Skips on Instagram, really inspiring and made me want to get better at skipping rope. I'm still working at it.
Andrew Huberman: First of all, it really gets my heart rate up and it improves multiple aspects of endurance, because as you recall earlier, the different bins of endurance that include muscular endurance, anaerobic, that 3 to 12 minute range and then 30 minutes or longer, none of them really precisely match what's accomplished in this 35 minute or so cardiovascular session where I'm pushing hard but not all out. But that's exactly the reason to do it, which is that it taps into multiple fuel systems for the muscle and multiple aspects of the heart and capillaries and arteries and veins that are involved in generating that movement. So it really cuts a broad swath into multiple categories of endurance. And also just keep in mind what this foundational or optimal fitness protocol is really designed to do. In my mind, a foundational fitness protocol is one that leaves you or has you in a state where if you need to walk really far and carry a bunch of weight, you can do it.

Andrew Huberman: If you need to lift a heavy object with your legs, you can do it. If you need to run really fast for two minutes, you can do it. And if you need to run a little bit further, like maybe in 10 minutes for whatever reason, you can do that. So it's a really kind of all around fitness program and that 35 minute run, again, could be swapped with a 35 minute erg row. Or sometimes if you only have access to a stationary bike, you could do that. I suppose if you didn't have access to any equipment and running is not your thing, one thing that I have done, especially if I've been stuck in a hotel 'cause I arrived late someplace and I really want to get this workout in, you could do the dreaded burpee. I know there are a lot of opinions out there, some people think burpees are downright dangerous, other people love burpees. You could do that. Or you could do really fast but full jumping jacks. I know that's a little PE class, right? Physical education class-ish. But sometimes if I need to get the workout in, what I'll do in a hotel if I've arrived late in particular day of travel is I will find the stairwell, the fire stairwell, I'll make sure by the way that I can get back into the building 'cause I've been locked in those stairwells before. And I will simply walk really fast up the stairwell as many flights of stairs as there are, or maybe even jog it, not quite sprint, but a run up those stairs over and over and over again in order to get that 35 minutes of 75% to 80% of max output cardiovascular work done. And if I'm really just restricted to my hotel room, I'll just do jumping jacks for 30, 35 minutes, sometimes while watching something on TV. And believe me, if you're doing full jumping jacks, like really extending your legs, really getting arms overhead and really doing the full movement, by the time you hit five or six minutes you are going to be sweating and your heart rate is really going to be up.
Andrew Huberman: I'd like to take a brief break and acknowledge our sponsor, Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is a vitamin, mineral, probiotic and adaptogen drink designed to help you meet all of your foundational nutritional needs. I've been taking Athletic Greens daily since 2000. Andy twelve. So I'm delighted that they're a sponsor of this podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens, and the reason I still take Athletic Greens once or twice a day, is that it helps me meet all of my foundational nutritional needs. That is, it covers my vitamins, my minerals. Andy the probiotics are especially important to me. Athletic Greens also contains adaptogens, which are critical for recovering from stress, from exercise, from work, or just general life. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to Athleticgreens.com Huberman to claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs and they'll give you a year supply of vitamin D. Three K, two. Again, if you'd like to try Athletic Greens, go to Athleticgreens.com Huberman to claim the special offer.
Andrew Huberman: You hear this all the time that doing these big, heavy compound movements or resistance training increases androgens things like testosterone, Dht, Dhea and so forth. Does anyone know how that actually happens? What is it about engaging motor neurons under heavy loads? Sends a signal to the endocrine system, hey, release testosterone? I've never actually been able to find that in a textbook.

Duncan French: Yeah, well, I mean and how can.

Andrew Huberman: I do more of that?

Duncan French: As much as I know. And again, I'm digging out into the annals of Duncan French's kind of brain now. But yeah, I mean, I think it's the stress response, right? It's mechanical stress and it's metabolic stress. And the downstream regulation of testosterone release at the Gonads comes from many different areas. My work primarily looked at catecholamines and sympathetic arousal.

Andrew Huberman: So things like epinephrine adrenaline, correct?

Duncan French: Yeah, epinephrine adrenaline. Noradrenaline how they were signaling cascade using the Hpa axis, releasing cortisol, and then looking at how that also influenced the adrenal medulla to release androgens and then signaling that at the gonads.

Andrew Huberman: That raises an interesting question. So, presumably, weight training in women, people who don't have testes, also, it increases testosterone. And is that purely through the Adrenals, when women lift weights, their adrenal glands release testosterone? Absolutely.

Duncan French: I mean, that is the only area of testosterone release for females. And yes, it's the same downstream cascade. Obviously, the extent to which it happens is significantly less in females. But that's how you there's good data out there that shows females can increase their anabolic environment, their internal anabolic milieu, using resistance training as a stressor, and then they get the consequent muscle tissue growth, whether it's tendon, ligament adaptations, the beneficial consequences of resistance training, which is driven by anabolic stimuli.

Andrew Huberman: Yeah, I have two questions about that. The first one is something that you mentioned, which is that the androgens the testosterone comes from the Adrenals under resistance loads in women. Is the same true in men? I mean, we hear that the testes produce testosterone when we weight train for men that have testes. But do we know whether or not it's the Adrenals or the testes in men that are increasing testosterone more? Both a little bit from each.

Duncan French: The field is divided presently in as much as understanding the acute Adrenergic response in terms of anabolic response to exercise in an acute phase and the exposure to a stimulus that is stress driven, which might be partly from the adrenal glands partly from the Gonads versus a longitudinal exposure to anabolic environments, which is primarily driven by, obviously, the Gonads and the release, the endocrine environment from testosterone release at the Gonads. So the field is split in terms of how exercise is promoting hypertrophy muscle tissue growth and whether that is very much an adrenal stimuli or if that's significant enough in these acute responses versus the longitudinal exposure. Just elevated basal levels of anabolic testosterone habitual level.

Andrew Huberman: So it sounds like in most case, like with most things, it's probably both. It's probably the adrenaline and the gonads. Yeah. And then you mentioned that testosterone can have enhancing effects, growth effects on tendon and ligament also that you don't often hear about that. People always think testosterone muscle, but testosterone has a lot of effects on other tissues that are important for performance, it sounds like.

Duncan French: Absolutely. I think the testosterone hormone listen there's androgen receptors on neural tissue, on neural.

Andrew Huberman: Axons pretty much everywhere.

Duncan French: Exactly. So the binding capacity of testosterone and influencing different tissues within the body I touched on muscle tissue, but the ligaments, the tendons, even bone, to some extent, testosterone is potential to influence that in terms of removing osteopenic kind of characteristics, et cetera. So, yeah, it's a magic hormone, let's say, with many end impacts in terms of adaptation.

Andrew Huberman: I definitely want to get back to your trajectory.
Duncan French: Basically, imagine a 20 foot by 20 foot square of turf with a small raise in the middle. I e the crown so it slopes to the edges. And then you throw out a white jack, a smaller ball, and then you roll out larger balls to try and get closest to the jack. It's a very European thing, let's say. Yeah. Sports Performance at Crown Green. Bowling. There you go.

Andrew Huberman: All right. Wow. And then to mixed martial arts.

Duncan French: Absolutely.

Andrew Huberman: And everything in between. So along those lines, could you give us a little bit about your background? Where did you start out? Where are you from originally?

Duncan French: Yeah, I'm from the northeast of England. So I'm from a town called Harrogate, which is in Yorkshire, which is a northern kind of area of the nice.

Andrew Huberman: Sunny weather all year long.

Duncan French: Yeah, you can imagine with the two weeks of summer that we get. But, yeah, I mean, I did my undergraduate studies there in sports science. I did teacher training to be a physical education teacher. After that, like most people, I then worked as a high school physical education teacher. Great experience working with kids, developing athletic qualities. But something in the back of my mind always, I wanted more. I wanted to be at the higher end of elite sport. I was a failed athlete. Like many people, I represented my country in different sports and things, but I never made it professionally. So that little seed was sown in as much as I then started to reach out to different areas to do a PhD, whether it was in the UK or also Chanced, my arm took a punt, see if I could get over to the States. All my buddies were going on gap years after the Finnish University or whatever and going to Bali and hanging out or whatever, traveling through Thailand. And I figured, Well, I've always loved the States and can I go and kill two birds with 1 st and do something academic, continue my studies, but also do it in a different environment and get some life experience? And many, many rejections, as I'm sure you're kind of aware from different professors, whether it's Roger or William Craven.

Andrew Huberman: You just wrote to these folks.

Duncan French: I just cold called and sent out information and saying, yeah, so have you got any opportunities? Pushed back from more, but dogged and kept asking and, yeah. Dr. William Kramer, who was at Ball State University in Indiana at the time, a muscle neuroendocrinologist and researcher in muscle physiology using resistance training. He basically said, Listen, I can guarantee you funding for the first year of your studies, but not the next three.

Andrew Huberman: Sounds like a typical academic response. I can take care of you, but not that well, necessarily. Right.

Duncan French: So, spoke to my parents and said, hey, can we take a punt? And they were great in supporting me. And, yeah, long story short, came out to begin my PhD at Ball State. After a year, Dr. Kramer transferred to Yukon, Connecticut, in stores in the Northeast there, and I transferred to him with him. And yeah, four great years with my PhD and getting my PhD with a really prolific research group that looked at neuroendocrinology hormonal work, but using resistance training primarily as an exercise, stressor as the major mechanism, and then looking at all the different physiologies off the back of resistance training.

Andrew Huberman: Yeah, you guys were enormously productive. I found dozens of papers on how weight training impacts hormones, and your name is on all of them, and it's remarkable. I have a question about this. I'll just inject a question about weight training and hormones.
Andy Galpin: That's going to help you identify where you need to go. So if you can do all those things you're going to be in a good spot to balance specificity and variation. All right? So if you want to make sure you grow your biceps, you better make sure your biceps are working. Having said that, if you over rely on specificity you're going to increase the likelihood of overuse injuries which is going to come back. Andy actually hamper consistency over time. All right, so this is when hedging towards specificity is important. But too much can cause a problem if you go the other direction and you go too much variation. So imagine you're just sort of doing all kinds of different exercises every time you work out. That's actually not enough stimuli directly on the muscle or muscle groups or movement pattern if you're wanting to learn a new movement to get you very far. And so this is a classic problem of I'm doing a lot of work but I don't have a very clear direction. I lack specificity. So I'm working, but I'm not seeing a lot of improvements. And this is like in the business world, et cetera.

Andy Galpin: This is like doing a whole bunch of different things means you get nothing really done. So that's the game we're going to play here, right? How do we overload this stuff? How do we make sure we're balancing specificity and variation? How do we make sure I want to do this? And then how do I individualize it for my needs and circumstances andy movement restrictions, andy of time availability, andy my calendar and desires and all these things. So those are the concepts we absolutely have to hit. The methods that we choose run across a handful of variables. And we call these things modifiable variables because as you modify them or you make different choices within these variables, you get different outcomes or adaptations. This is exactly what determines the nine adaptations that we've been talking about. So the way that I like to say this is exercises do not determine adaptation. So you can't simply go, I want to get stronger, therefore I'm going to choose these exercises. That's not how it works.

Andy Galpin: What determines adaptation is the execution of the exercises. So deadlift is my favorite example. A deadlift is a common example that people think of when they want to choose a lower body strength exercise. But a deadlift will not increase your strength unless you're executing it in the proper fashion. I'm not only talking about technique here. I'm talking about these modifiable variables. The same thing for power exercise science commonly see mistakes of doing activities like a box jump, which is great. People think, oh, I'm going to improve my power. Which we know is extremely highly correlated to activities of daily living and particularly living unassisted as you age, right, is reduction in power. So they'll do an activity like a box jump. What they're failing to realize is unless you do it powerfully, you won't actually increase power. If you don't move fast, you won't get faster. So the way that we manipulate these variables is everything to determining the adaptation you get or again, don't get. So with that foundation, I think we can kind of run right into these things and we can start off with perhaps speed and power. And what I would like to do is walk you through all those modifiable variables, what to do with them, and then hit you with as many different methodologies as we really have time for. And then we'll move on to strength and hypertrophy and kind of round the entire thing out. And then maybe at the end we can talk some other variables, like what happens if I have a training protocol and I'm halfway through it and I can't finish my workout?

Andy Galpin: What should I do? Reduce my weight or reduce my duration or things like that? So there's lots of what if scenarios that we can go through that potentially a lot of people listening have questions about. So sound like a plan?

Andrew Huberman: Sounds like a plan.
Andrew Huberman: Training and skill learning is incredibly mentally fatiguing. I've often wondered why when one works out hard, whether or not it's with run or with the weights, why it's hard to think later in the day, right? Yeah. There really does seem to be something to it. And I've wondered, is it depletion of adrenaline? Dopamine? I sometimes think it might be dopamine. And here I'm totally speculating. I don't have any data to support this, but if you hit a really hard workout or run early in the day, oftentimes the brain just doesn't want to do hard mental work, which gives me great admiration for these athletes that are drilling their mind and body all day, every day with breaks. So what are your thoughts? What leads to the mental fatigue after physical performance?

Duncan French: Well, again, I don't want to talk out. I'm talking to the man here.

Andrew Huberman: Well, we're just two scientists speculating on this point. Up until now, you've been giving us concrete, peer reviewed, study based feedback on my questions. But if we were to speculate, I think this is a common occurrence. People think if I get that really good workout in in the morning, I feel better all day. That's true. Unless that workout is is really intense or really long.

Duncan French: Yeah.

Andrew Huberman: And then you just the mind just somehow won't latch on to mental work quite as well.

Duncan French: Just philosophically, I think there's coming back to this kind of stress consideration like a public speaking or taking an exam. If you have an amazing coach who is setting up training in a particular way, it's challenging. There's a strain related to it. I'm not talking physical strain. I'm talking figuring things out, figuring out the skill. And I think that can be stressful. Like the learning process can be stressful. So we've touched on stress. I also think if they hit the right technique, that reward center in the brain, that dopamine shot is going to fly up there. And there's only so many times that we can get that before that becomes dampened. And I think there's an energetic piece to it. There's the fueling of the brain. There's the carbohydrate fueling exercise. That actually the strategy around how you fuel for learning and fuel for physical training is actually pretty similar.

Andrew Huberman: Glucose.

Duncan French: Yeah, it's glucose. It's sugar at the end of the day. Right. So are you fueling accordingly around your training sessions be that very physical because everyone thinks, okay, I'm going to jump on a treadmill and I'm going to bang out 15 sprints max effort, and I'm going to be dropping off and lying on the floor at the end of it. I need to refuel. Well, what about the refueling of the brain in a very demanding exercise or drilling session where you're looking at technique that you're trying to figure out that's very challenging for your mind to figure out the complexity of it that still needs to be fueled or refueled afterwards. And I think that obviously might be an area where athletes do themselves a disservice by not appropriate fueling from what might be considered to be a lower intensity session. But the cognitive challenge has been significantly high.

Andrew Huberman: So they're doing skill work or drill work, and it's taxing the brain, and they're thinking, oh, I wasn't pushing hard lifts or doing sprints, and so I can just go off the rest of my day. But then their mind is drifting.

Duncan French: I speculate.

Andrew Huberman: Yeah, that seems very reasonable. I mean, I know that here and presumably with the other athletes you've worked with, nutrition is a huge aspect of that. And I think the general public can learn a lot from athletic nutrition because at the end of the day, the general public is trying to attend to their kids, attend to their work, whether or not they're lawyers or whatever they need to focus. Nutrition is a barbed wire topic.
Duncan French: Absolutely. Yeah. You have to be strategic about when you use some of these interventions. And the time when you're preparing for a competition is not the appropriate time excuse me, is the appropriate time when you want to drive recovery and make sure that your body is optimized? When you're far away from a competition date or out of season or whatever it may be, and you're really trying to just tear up the body a little bit to allow it to its natural healing and adaptation processes to take place? Well, you don't want to negate that. You want the body to optimize its internal recovery, and that's how muscle growth is going to happen. So, interesting, there's a time kind of consideration that you need to make with these interventions, for sure.

Andrew Huberman: At the UFC Performance Center, are the fighters periodizing their cold exposure, or are they just doing cold at will?

Duncan French: Well, it's not just the UFC. And again, I talk about my personal experiences with different sports, I think just education around where science is at and our understanding of concepts like the use of cold exposure for recovery. Ice bath. Everyone wants to jump in an ice bath. But I think as we've stepped back and scientists have started to figure out and look at some of the data, we're now more intuitive about, well, actually, that might not be the best or the most optimal approach. And I think that's any given sport. So, yes, certainly here at the UFC, we're trying to educate our athletes around appropriate timing. And it's the same with nutrition. It's the same with an ice bath intervention. It's the same with lifting weights. It's the same with going for a run or working out on the bike. There's tactics to when you do things and when you don't do things. And I think stress and cold exposure, we have to have a consideration around that as well. But it's not just MMA fighters that's any athlete and I think the best professionals, the most successful professionals do that really well.

Duncan French: They listen. Number one, they educate themselves, and then they build structure. And I think at the most elite level, we always talk about it here at the UFC, but the most elite level, you're not necessarily training harder than anybody else. Everybody in the UFC trains hard. Like, everyone is training super hard. But the best athletes, the true elite levels, are the ones that can do it again and again and again on a daily basis and sustain a technical output for skill development. Therefore, their skills can improve, or physical development, their physical attributes can improve. So that ability to reproduce on a day to day basis falls into a recovery conversation. Now, when is the right time to use something like an ice bath? And when isn't is part of the the high performance conversation, for sure.

Andrew Huberman: So really, they're scientists. They're building structure. They're figuring out variables. But it sounds like the ability to do more quality work over time is one of the key variables.

Duncan French: I mean, it's fundamental. I mean, garbage in, garbage out, quality in, quality out. But in our sport, I talk about mixedmartial arts. Arts. It's truly a decathlon of combat. So there's so many different attributes, whether it's a grappling, whether it's a wrestling, whether it's a transition work, whether it's a stand up striking. So the different facets of a training program in this sport are significantly large compared to something like a wide receiver. In football. That's no disrespect for wide receivers, but they run routes. They're going to run a passing tree, and that's all they need to do. These guys have to be on the ground. They got to be great on the ground. They got to be great standing up. They've got to be great with the back against the fence. There's so many different kind of facets to our sport. So managing the distribution of all the training components is one of the biggest challenges of mixed martial arts. And the best guys get that right.

Duncan French: They allow their body to optimize the training. And remember, why are we doing training? We're doing training for technical and tactical improvement. Now, if your body is fatigued or you just can't expose yourself to more tactical development or technical development, then you're essentially doing yourself a disservice. You're going to be behind the curve with respect to those guys that can reproduce that day in, day out.
Andy Galpin: Yeah, momentum or movement. Right. So this is like think about this in old gym class. It's like your high knees andy, your butt kickers and just different things like that where you're moving in different planes, you're moving joints through tons of range of motion. You're getting a lot of movement there. So you're getting the local warm up. You're also getting the total systemic activation. Everything else is going on there. So that is what we consider to be a general warm up. Five minutes is a very sufficient number, perhaps ten if you're a slow goer achy and some things like that. And you really got to get the ankle warmed up. If you're doing lower body stuff, really make sure that that's moving correctly. The hips and knees will follow. Upper body stuff really good. The shoulder blades andy the neck, like making sure you're going there and the elbows will follow after that. So five to seven minutes of a general warm up.

Andy Galpin: A lot of the times, like classic exercise science, it will even just put you on a bike cycling for five minutes. I don't like that personally. Dynamic movement is more preferred. If you really just move for five to seven minutes, you'll be fine there. Now specificity within each movement, it's very important that your first exercise of the day is generally the thing you prioritize. That's oftentimes the most important you're going to do for it. It oftentimes is also the most complex and the most moving parts. So it tends to be multi joint. Therefore you need to have movement precision and skills dialed right. You don't typically start your workouts off with a forearm curl. You don't need a tremendous amount of warm up to get going on that. You're going to start off with medicine ball throws or a snatch or some agility work. You need to have the whole system going because multiple joints are moving. Position matters, technique, there's just a lot of skill requirement, et cetera. So the individualized workout or the specific workout for the specific movement for that very first one, my general rule of thumb is like whatever it takes to move perfect in that first exercise.

Andy Galpin: Past that, you don't necessarily need to do individualized warm ups for your next movements, unless it is a movement you're trying to learn or just even get a little bit better at. Like drop the load a little bit, work on some accruing, some practice reps. Fantastic. Or it's another dissimilar complex movement. So let's say your first exercise was a front squat and you got loaded for that. Andy now you're going to move into a pull up, but your mechanics aren't the best there. And so you really need to change and do some maybe more specific activation warm ups for that or something else or it's running or something totally different. So yeah, you don't need to re warm up for every single exercise as you go. Generally, once you're good to go, the same muscles that you're going to use in the next exercise are warm, same joints, then you're good to go.
Andrew Huberman: So what are the essential components of an effective strength and hypertrophy protocol?

Andy Galpin: Okay, so what I would like to actually do is walk you through both of those because as we mentioned before, they overlap. But the training needs to be differentiated so that you can optimize either strength, hypertrophy or if you actually want, you can get a combination of both. This allows you to then get the adaptation you want, avoid ones you don't want and then get it even a combination if that's the preference. So a lot of people will talk about I want to get a little stronger. I want to add some muscle. That's a different answer than someone who wants to truly maximize muscle which is a different answer from somebody who wants to maximize strength which is a different answer from somebody who wants to maximize strength but not actually gain muscle. So we have all these combinations. What's important to understand before we get into the details is a couple of things. Number one, we've been teasing this concept so far of the concepts are few but the methods are many. And so I want to hit those concepts right now.

Andy Galpin: These are as you as you say, these are the non negotiables that have to happen in any training program and I'm referring to these in the strength and hypertrophy conversation. But these are true of power development, speed development, muscular endurance, endurance, any other thing. These are things that just have to happen for any training program to work. I mentioned one a little bit earlier, which was adherence. Andy so my frequent collaborator Dan Garner will constantly say consistency beats intensity. Again, in fact, the literature will show you very clearly adherence is the number one predictor of physical fitness outcomes. So we want to do something that you will engage in, you'll put effort into and you'll be able to repeat consistently over time. So that's number one. The second one is and this is a major reason that people don't hit their fitness goals. In fact, I would argue outside of not doing it, the number one mistake they make is progressive overload. So I'm going to walk you through exactly how much you should be creatine your sets and reps and weight, et cetera per week, per month later. But that's the biggest thing.
Andrew Huberman: What are a few of the major changes that occur in muscle, nerve, et cetera, when we experience hypertrophy? I've heard of protein synthesis changes. I'm assuming that's true. Maybe you can tell us a bit more about that. Changes in blood flow, perhaps. Changes in neural innervation. Who knows? Maybe even changes in fascia. I'm not aware of any specifically, but I have to imagine that they're somehow involved.

Andy Galpin: Sure. So when we talk about hypertrophy, a lot of the adaptations are going to be similar because the mode of training is close enough, so your nerves probably aren't smart enough to differentiate between a set of five reps or a set of eight repetitions. They're smart enough to differentiate anything, like they know everything that's going on, but it's going to be a huge overlap. The primary difference with hypertrophy is a couple of things. So if you think about the muscle microstructure, I have a whole series of videos on YouTube, if you want to see the visuals behind this. In fact, in there, I include the specific diameter, size of muscle fibers that I was failed to give you a few minutes ago.

Andrew Huberman: We will provide an active link to this.

Andy Galpin: So what happens is this when we talk about and you hear this classic buzz phrase of muscle protein synthesis, generally what we're talking about there is contractile units. And so when we say contractile units, we're talking about the myosin and actin. And so what we're really trying to do is say, okay, there's some amount of protein turnover where we're coming in and we're trying to add more proteins to the equation. And so what has to happen there is a series of steps. So step number one is there has to be some sort of signal from the external world. This could actually oftentimes it's things like stretching of the cell wall, which is what happens with exercise. Right. So you're contracting Andy shortening get this big stretch of the cell wall. It can come from as simple things like an amino acid infusion this is just creatine protein. This is why protein ingestion alone is anabolic. Right. It will help you grow muscle independent.

Andrew Huberman: Of even moving, just eating protein will grow your muscles.

Andy Galpin: Yeah, certainly, Andy, those data are very clear. Of course, like anything, there's a saturation point in terms of total amount you need to get to and things like that. But, yeah, if you were to walk into a laboratory fasted overnight and I gave you 30 grams of protein, we would see a very measurable increase in protein synthesis quite clearly for several hours, probably four to five plus hours. We could maybe bring in some people that would know those data better.

Andrew Huberman: But many hours with no weight training.

Andy Galpin: Correct.

Andrew Huberman: I am betting that most people are not aware of that fact.

Andy Galpin: You know, what's actually interesting about it is if you do the exact same study again and you just did strength training, you would also see an improvement in protein synthesis. Right. But those factors are independent and the mechanisms are independent, such that if you do them both together, they stack on top of each other, which is really wonderful. And if you were to add carbohydrate into that mix, now you're actually adding fuel for the entire muscle protein synthesis process. And now you're going to see even additive benefits. And this is why for so many years, this is what bore the whole post exercise anabolic window thing, which is like you got to get carbs and protein in post exercise to maximize muscle protein. Now, that turned out to be not totally true in terms of the window.

Andrew Huberman: Window not be as strict as people initially asserted, as I recall. But still, I think that's super interesting. These are parallel pathways for protein synthesis. Simply eating protein or training each independently increases protein synthesis.
Andrew Huberman: So Wednesday is torso and neck and then comes Thursday and that means another cardiovascular exercise session, although it's a brief one. Unlike the endurance training on Sunday, the cardiovascular session on Thursday, and again, for me it falls on Thursday, but for it could fall on a different day depending on when you started this protocol, is going to be about, again, about 35 minutes of, for me, running, although it could be rowing or it could be cycling, it could be something of that sort. The goal of this workout is what's important. The goal of this workout is to tap into, remember that long list that we talked about earlier where you've got skill and speed and power and strength and hypertrophy, et cetera, different forms of endurance, is to get into that range of endurance where your heart rate is elevated quite a bit more than zone two, but that you're not really going all out sprint. So what that means for me is warming up for about 5 to 10 minutes.

Andrew Huberman: That could be jogging, a little bit of light calisthenics, might even be hopping on a stationary bike, although to be honest I loathe the stationary bike, and then setting a timer and doing about 30, but ideally 35 minutes of what I call 75% to 80% of all out. Okay, now I realize this spits in the face of all you heart rate monitor wearing super techy exercise types. But when I think of all out sprint, I think of 100%. And what is that? In my mind that's somebody is chasing me with a needle full of poison and I am sprinting away at maximal speed. That for me is 100%. So after a brief warm up, what I'm going to do is go out, typically outside, although sometimes it has to be on a treadmill if I'm traveling, and move, run for about 30 to 35 minutes at about 75% or 80% of that all out. What that means is that I'm striving to keep a steady pace, but in reality I don't.

Andrew Huberman: I sometimes have to stop at a stoplight, there are cars, please don't run into traffic just to maintain that speed and that timing, that would be terribly antagonistic to fitness, in particular, lifespan. That running tends to be running in which I'm breathing hard so I'm not able to restrict myself to purely nasal breathing. And I should have mentioned earlier, on the Sunday long ruck or weighted hike or jog, if I'm alone, I try and do pure nasal breathing. If I'm with other people or I'm talking, obviously I'm not going to do pure nasal breathing because I'm talking, although I'm sure that sometimes they wish I was doing pure nasal breathing. That Thursday workout accomplishes a number of things.
Andy Galpin: Like we've just had new things come out in this last couple of years where that detraining effect we thought was a reason of well, what happens is, if you had the muscle before and you brought in these nuclei and they differentiated and turned into a nuclei and then the muscle got small again, you preserve those nuclei. And that's why when you go to train again, they were already around. So the muscle grows faster the second time than it did the first time. Well, now it looks like that's actually not the case. In fact, it's actually probably what's happening is it's an epigenetic change in the nuclei's ability to access the DNA needed to grow muscle. It's effectively the analogy we used. The nuclei are remembering how to ride a bike. So it's quite funny that you said that, because it's not really necessarily that they're being preserved over time, they have learned the sequence it takes to grow the protein there, and it happens faster the second time. And we've also learned that there are specific nuclei.

Andy Galpin: We've known this for actually a while. We found this in our lab. We didn't discover it. We saw this in our sum of our hybrids. But there are different shapes. The nuclei, some are more oval, some are more elongated. And the shape determines a lot of the function. Some of them are hanging out more towards the periphery, and some of them are hanging out right around the nucleus. Well, it looks like there's actually probably different types of nuclei, a lot of them that are specific to the mitochondria. In fact, you can see on some of the imaging we have, they're just packed around the mitochondria. And there are some that are probably specific to injury repair. And so this is probably explaining a lot of the individual variation. I mean, I know you've said previously you're very slow at recovery. There's a lot of things that go into that. And I would love to walk through sort of all the buckets, maybe later into recovery. But one of the inherent genetic variations is, could be simply that you maybe have more or less of the nuclei responsible for tissue repair.

Andy Galpin: That's something that's been happening in the last handful of months that's been coming out. We'll see if that holds up as true or not. So, as we're learning more and more almost every day about muscle physiology, what's super fun and interesting, and I think the most exciting what to do in terms of how to train and how to eat and how to do everything else to get these adaptations, has been pretty well established for a long, long, long time. We're just figuring out what's happening in the muscle now, but we know what to do. So, from a practical standpoint, putting together protocols for any outcome that you want or don't want for any modality. You don't have a gym, you have weights, you have dumbbells. Only you only have kettlebells. You don't want to, you only use body weight. You only have three days a week. You have seven days a week. You want to maximize muscle growth, you want to get a little bit stronger. Any of these variables you want to throw at me.

Andy Galpin: We have a large evidence base for exactly how to get those adaptations and not others. So while we have a lot to learn about the mechanisms and the physiology, we have pretty good legs to stand in terms of what to do to get whatever adaptations you want.
Andrew Huberman: Well, when people talk about muscle memory, like the ability to ride a bicycle after so many years of not having tried to ride one that's actually largely independent of the muscle has something to do with the muscle. It's basically a nervous system phenomenon.

Andy Galpin: 100%.

Andrew Huberman: So muscle memory has been co opted by different communities to mean different things on our side.

Andy Galpin: Muscle memory is going to mean that ability to remember that muscle size, right, that hypertrophy. Because, as you explained, the motor control thing is it's a totally a nerve thing. I'll give you this one. The nerve. People can have this one.

Andrew Huberman: Well, it seems to me that there are a tremendous number of parallels between strength and hypertrophy changes and neuroplasticity. This is coming up again and again in this conversation because we know, for instance, that if you are exposed to a couple of different languages early on in life, you will learn any number of different languages far more easily later in life, of course. And that's because there's some crossover between different languages, especially latin based languages, that allows for that. There's a substrate for it. It's similar to the ability to hop on a bicycle again phenomenon or play an instrument phenomenon, but it's broader than that. And again, I think this speaks to the huge number of different adaptive changes that are occurring in the cells and in the nerves that innervate these cells when one experiences increases in strength and hypertrophy.

Andy Galpin: So to round that out, Andy, to go back to what I was saying there, what we're actually learning now is that nucleation thing. And by the way, this entire trajectory story is probably over the last like, eight years, this is how fast we've changed our understanding of how muscle grows. The sarcoplasm reticulum thing five years ago was bro science. Now it's pretty well established. The myronucleation thing was eight to ten years ago. It's changing every week. This paper we just submitted this week showed actually why we had generally thought a few years ago. And in fact, you can find me on podcasts and probably in some of my videos talking about this. And I'm going to tell you right now those things are wrong.
Andy Galpin: Correct. And the beauty of this whole thing is, while we don't yet know the mechanisms specifically, and there's a lot of confusion and there's a lot of changes that happen, we actually just submitted a paper a few days ago myself, Jimmy Bagley at San Francisco, and Kevin Muric has a wonderful muscle physiology lab at Arkansas. And this is a very lay article, actually. It's incredibly easy to read. We describe the role of myonucleation in muscle hypertrophy, and this is actually a lot of interesting stuff we get into there, but we're learning more and more about it. As a quick example, so skeletal muscle is unique in the fact that it is so large in diameter. It's also unique in the fact that it's multinucleated. What that means is, typically in biology, you see, like, a cell has one nucleus. That's the place that houses and holds the DNA, and it's a control center. It tells it to grow, shrink, die, repair, that whole thing.

Andy Galpin: Well, skeletal muscle in human is awesome because it has thousands, if not more, this nuclei, which gives it that plasticity. And so a normal cell has one place it has to go to for any time it wants to upregulate, down, regulate, do whatever. The thing is, your muscle fibers have these little control centers all throughout them. And for years we were like, okay, great. The amount of hypertrophy that you can experience is probably limited by the amount of nuclei you have because you're not going to exceed a certain size of muscle fiber if that's going to mean you lose control. And so we're like, okay, great. We found and identified a limiting factor to what will determine how much a muscle can actually grow. And then the next question was, then where are these things coming from? And this is where satellite cells come in. And so it was very clear, a satellite cell that's lying dormant sort of on the outside, the periphery of the fiber, will then go in into the fiber.

Andy Galpin: It will turn into my nuclei, and then it can actually increase your diameter like that. Andy so then actually, it was like, hey, you're actually limited by the amount of these satellite cells you can get in and turn into nuclei. And then the evidence came out that showed, hey, what if you detrain? So what if I used to lift weights like a long time ago, andy, I got big, but now I've lost a lot of my muscle. If I train again, you actually get that muscle back faster than it took you the very first time to build it. That's what we call muscle memory, like an art field. Now, on your side of the equation, muscle memory is something different, right? It's a nerve.
Andrew Huberman: Let's talk about strength and hypertrophy. If you would, please remind us what strength and hypertrophy are in terms of the specific adaptation they represent. What I mean by that is, when somebody is training for strength, what are they really training for? Obviously, it means the ability to move more weight, but I know that it includes a number of other things as well. And when one is training for hypertrophy, for the growth of muscle fibers, what does that represent? Because I think if people understand that, they will far better understand the methods and protocols that are going to be best for strength and hypertrophy at its core.

Andy Galpin: You've basically described it. When we talk about strength, we're talking about an actual function. So can you create more force across a muscle or muscle groups or total movement? When we talk about hypertrophy now, we're specifically referring to just an increase in size. There's no actual mention of function. So a muscle can grow larger without actually technically being stronger. For a number of reasons. However, there is a strong relationship between strength and hypertrophy. So a lot of the times in the general public, in the lay conversations, we sort of lump those two things in as the same thing. Andy so we have to recognize people who are new to training or people even are intermediately trained. There is a huge overlap between strength and hypertrophy. Once you get past that, though, they become disentangled. And a good example of it is this if you look at the strongest people in the world, this would be people who compete in the sport of powerlifting.

Andy Galpin: That's a true test of maximal strength. So it is a deadlift, a bench press and a back squat, and you're going to do a one repetition max in all three of those. And so whoever wins is the person who lifted the most amount of weight one time. That's it. It's not like World Strongest Man where it is how many reps can you do in a row? Or your time right is a true maximal strength test. Andy you compare those to, say, bodybuilders. Now, both of those individuals are strong, and both of those individuals have a lot of muscle. However, it is extremely clear the power lifters will be significantly stronger than the bodybuilders on average, right? There are individual exceptions, but we're just talking collective averages, and the bodybuilders will have more muscle than the other ones. In addition, whether you look at Olympic weightlifting or power lifting or World's Strongest Man for that matter, there are weight classes. And the reason is, as you go up in weight classes, you will always see the world records go higher and higher and higher. So you can clearly get stronger without adding any muscle.
Andrew Huberman: What are some of the other things that strength Andy hypertrophy training can provide? I know a lot of people use strength and hypertrophy training for changing their aesthetics. What is your sense about its potency for changing aesthetics as compared to, say, cardiovascular exercise.

Andy Galpin: Yeah. The mantra I always like is the reason you want to exercise is threefold. Right? You want to look good, feel good, play good. That comes from sport, comes from football specifically. We always say that. And what that means, really, is you want to look good. People want to look the way they want to look, whatever that means to them. And there are any versions of what you feel to be aesthetically pleasing, and that's totally irrelevant. But people want to look the way they want to look. Number two, you want to be able to feel good. What's that mean? You want to be injury free. You want to have energy throughout the day. You want to be able to ex cute anything you want to. So whether you want to go surf in the morning, you want to play racquetball or you want to hike or you want to do all three of those in one day, you should have the ability to do that. And then you want to play good, which means you should be able to execute Andy Galpin activities that you want to execute, whatever that means.

Andy Galpin: All right, so backing all up. What's that got to do with your question? One of the major benefits of strength training is the responses tend to happen extremely fast. So you can see noticeable changes in muscle size, certainly within a month, absolutely within six weeks. And so we have this wonderful feedback loop that sort of tells you, am I doing this incorrectly? Oh, my gosh, yes, I am. Also, it's very addicting. The feedback, the response, the physical changes, whether this is actually 0.2 or three, look good or feel good, play good, or it's even just part one, you're starting to see that when you compare that to things like fat loss, that journey tends to be longer. It's more difficult. It's more reliant upon other factors like nutrition, et cetera. Strength training is really about, like there's some very minimal nutrition requirements. Outside of that, it comes down to the training, and the feedback is immediate.

Andy Galpin: That's powerful because if you look across the literature on exercise adherence, you'll see that that is, in fact, the number one predictor of effectiveness of any training program. So what that means is if you were to put Andy variable possible and figure out what is going to determine whether or not this program works, this is what we typically call the methods are many and the concepts are few. So the methods of exercise, the methods of strength training, the methods of hypertrophy training, which we'll talk about, are infinite. However, there are only a handful of key concepts that you have to achieve in order for that program to work. Adherence is one of them, and again, is often the top one. So you need to do something. You need to do something consistently when you are getting that feedback and you're seeing results in your appearance immediately. And you see that every single day.

Andy Galpin: Every time you take off your shirt or every time you look in the mirror, you see that result that tendons to drive adherence really powerfully. So it's important to give people wins, especially people who are not maybe like you and I, who are like, I'm going to lift weights and I'm going to exercise no matter what the rest of my life, because I just love it. Not everyone's like that. And so giving them a little bit of carrot of success, and if you can achieve that in, say, three to four to five weeks already, it's very powerful tool.
Andy Galpin: There's a wonderful saying. I think it was Bill Bauerman, one of the founders of Nike, and he always said, if you have a body, you're an athlete. And I think that's very important for people to understand because one of the major disservices we've done in this field is convince people that things like strength training are for athletes or for growing bigger muscles, and cardiovascular training are for things like fat loss, andy heart health. And that is a tendons disservice because it puts a lot of unnecessary barriers and leads to a lot of false assumptions and then therefore, poor actions. Classic examples of this are people who are resistant to strength training because they don't want to put on too much muscle, people who only perform one type of exercise because they want, say, fat loss, or they're in it for longevity and health and they're not worried about being an athlete. And so right out the gates, we can actually draw back a little bit to what we were our previous conversation when I walked you through the history of exercise science. And the reason I did that is to help you understand these are the railroads that you're running down and you don't even realize it in terms of everyone thinks of strength training and they immediately default to our principles to optimize muscle growth. Andy that's not the only adaptation one should be after with strength training.

Andy Galpin: When we think of endurance training, we immediately default to things like, again, cardiovascular health or fat loss or things like that. What I really want to do across this entire series and conversations is to just break that immediately. Talk about all the other things that you can do with your training andy. So that people can be comfortable andy. Confident in doing an optimal training program for whatever goal they have, whether that be specific, like growing muscle or nonspecific, like just feeling better, having more energy, being more prepared for life and longevity. Andy so to directly answer your question, we could do 100 episodes on the benefits of exercise and we could run all the way from mood and focus cognitive tasks to a better immune function. You'll get less colds, you'll fight them off more effectively to mortality, right? So some of the strongest predictors of how long and how well you will live or exercise however, there are independent benefits that come from just endurance training and there are independent benefits that come from strength training. And so to just give you one categorically, the way that you want to think about this is resistance exercise. And strength training is the number one tool to combat neuromuscular aging.
Andrew Huberman: Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and sciencebased tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today I have the pleasure of introducing Dr. Duncan French as my guest on the Huberman Lab podcast. Dr. French is the Vice President of Performance at the UFC Performance in Institute, and he has over 20 years of experience working with elite professional and Olympic athletes. Prior to joining the UFC, french was the Director of Performance Science at the University of Notre Dame, and he has many, many quality, peer reviewed studies to his name, exploring, for instance, how the particular order of exercise, whether or not one performs endurance exercise prior to resistance training or vice versa.

Andrew Huberman: How that impacts performance of various movements and endurance training protocols as well as the impact on hormones such as testosterone, estrogen and some of the stress hormones such as cortisol. He's also done fascinating work exploring how neurotransmitters things like dopamine and epinephrine, also called adrenaline, can impact hormones and how hormones can impact neurotransmitter release. What's particularly unique about Dr. French's work is that he's figured out specific training protocols that can maximize, for instance, testosterone output or reduce stress hormone output in order to maximize the effects of training in the short term and in the long term. So today you're going to learn a lot of protocols whether or not you're into resistance training or endurance training. You will learn, for instance, how to regulate the duration of your training and the type of training that you do in order to get the maximum benefit from that training over time. So whether or not you are somebody who just exercises recreationally for your health, whether or not you're an amateur or professional athlete, or whether or not you're just trying to maximize your health through the use of endurance and or resistance training, today's discussion will have a wealth of takeaways for you.

Andrew Huberman: There are only a handful of people working at the intersection of elite performance mechanistic science and that can do so in a way that leads to direct, immediately applicable protocols that anybody can benefit from. Dr. French also provides some incredibly important insights about the direction that sport and exercise are taking in the world today and their applications towards performance and health.
Andy Galpin: You're going to start seeing decrements past again around the age of 40 or so. Now, there's a lot of genetic variation there and a lot of other things go into that equation, like your sleep and your nutrition, but that's a fair number to sort of think about. One actually response is it's actually sort of counterintuitive. The wonderful thing about strength training is you don't actually have to start at a young age. In fact, I was reading a paper this morning because of our previous conversation, it was in over age 90. So these are folks 90 plus, and they saw improvements like 30% to 170% in things like muscle size and hypertrophy over a very short period of time. I think it was twelve weeks. So you don't actually have to start. There are some adaptations that you're going to need for health that you god, you really need to start in your twenty s.

Andy Galpin: The reason I like to mention that is because if you are listening and you are 50 and you're like, oh shit, I haven't been strength training, you're not toast. You should absolutely start now, but you're going to be able to get to a fantastic spot very quickly. Similarly, though, if you are 20 or 25 and 30 and you aren't lifting, there are still many reasons why you should do that. Now, I'd like to point that out because a lot of folks will be like, oh, my gosh, they said I have to do it when I'm 20 or 25 or I'll be sort of screwed. And that's not the case at all. There's really no age limit on this. In fact, there's actually interesting data that just came out showing this reduction in muscle strength. Andy hypertrophy that I sort of talked about is basically ameliorated with a preservation of activity. In other words, you don't lose these functionalities because of aging.

Andy Galpin: You'd lose these because of a loss of training to state that, again, you don't lose these because of some innate physiological thing that happens with genes become less sensitive or you lose functionality. You pretty much can describe the loss of function of strength and muscle in aging as exclusively because of a loss of training and nutrition and anabolic resistance and some other things. So you can do a lot more than you think when it comes to maintaining high quality muscle. And that's really important to point out.

Andrew Huberman: I'm reminded of the words of the great Sherington. He won the Nobel Prize. Physiologist. I guess the neuroscientists try and claim him as a neuroscientist because he worked on the nervous system. The physiologist claim as a physiologist, he.

Andy Galpin: Is 100% a physiologist.

Andrew Huberman: I would call him a neuroscientist. Maybe we can argue about this later. We will. But I think one of the key things that Sherington pointed out was that and I believe the quote was that movement is the final common path. And what he was referring to was the fact that a significant fraction of the brain itself is devoted to our ability to move and our ability to engage in resistance type movements. And that resistance type movements and the continuation of movement throughout the lifespan is what keeps the brain young and healthy and vital. And there are so much data now to support that. But I'm so grateful that you brought up early this fact that there's a neuromuscular link, because I think a lot of people think about musculoskeletal. They forget that the nervous system is really in charge of the strength of the muscle contractions and the types of muscle contractions that occur. I'm certain we're going to get into that in a lot of depth today.

Andy Galpin: You're close there. We're not totally right, but we're close.

Andrew Huberman: Okay, well, I look forward to being corrected and to achieving the precision that you're known for around that discussion. So if we are to step back and say strength training and hypertrophy training is critical for people of all ages for developing and maintaining the neuromuscular system and for our ability to function in the world not just offset injury but the ability to pick things up and move, et cetera.
Peter Attia: Yeah, actually an interesting aside that I always tell my female patients who get a kick out of this, when you look at a woman's labs, you'll see her estrogen, her progesterone, her fsh, her LH, her testosterone, her sex hormone binding global and all these things. But based on the units they're reported in, it's a very distorting picture of what the most common androgen is in her body. If you actually convert them to the same units, she has much more testosterone in her body than estrogen.

Andrew Huberman: Interesting. Yeah, I did not know that. Then again, I've never been a woman getting my hormone profile.

Peter Attia: So even though a woman's testosterone is much less than a man than a man's level, it's still more than she has estrogen in her body.

Andrew Huberman: Wow.

Peter Attia: So phenotypically, right? Estrogen is the hormone that's dominating. She has much higher estrogen than a man and much lower testosterone than a man, but in absolute amounts, she has more testosterone than estrogen. Just worth pointing that out. Incredible what's happening to a woman from the age she starts menstruating until she goes through menopause, outside of pregnancy and birth control and stuff like that, is she has this cycle roughly every 28 days, but it can vary where at the beginning of her period, we call that day zero. Her estrogen and progesterone are very low. You can't measure them. And then what happens is the estrogen level starts to rise and it rises in response to a hormone called follicle stimulating hormone. Follicle stimulating hormone fsh that is getting her ready to ovulate and she ovulates at about the midpoint of her cycle. So if we're just going to make the math easy, on day 14, she's going to release a follicle from one of her ovaries, and the estrogen level is sort of rising, rising, rising.

Peter Attia: We love to measure hormones on day five because I want to have a standardized way in which I measure her hormones. So our women know if we're in the business of trying to understand her hormones, the day her period starts, even if it's just a day of spotting, that becomes our benchmark. And then day five, I want to see every hormone on that day. And if everything is going well, I know what her fsh LH estradiol and progesterone should be on that day. So the estrogen rises, starts to come down a little bit as she ovulates, and then the luteinizing hormone kicks on because it's now going to prepare her uterus for the lining to accommodate a pregnancy. So now you start to see estradiol go back. But now for the first time, progesterone goes up. So progesterone has been doing nothing for 14 days, and now it starts to rise. And actually progesterone is the hormone that's dominating the second half, which is called her luteal cycle. So the first 14 days is the follicular cycle, second is the luteal cycle. So once you get to about the halfway point of that, which is now just to do the math, 21 days in the body has figured out if she's pregnant or not. And again, most of the time she's not going to be pregnant. So the body says, oh, I don't need this lining that I've been preparing.

Peter Attia: I'm going to shed it. So now progesterone and estrogen start crashing, and the lining is what is being shed, and that is the menses, by the way. It's that last seven days of that cycle that in a susceptible woman is what creates those PMS symptoms. Actually, this is something that you would probably have a Peter understanding of than me. There is something about this in a susceptible woman where the enormous reduction of progesterone so quickly is probably impacting something in her brain. So I think this is a legitimate thing, right? It's not like, oh, she's crazy because she's having all these PMS symptoms. No, we know that that's the case because if you put women on progesterone for those seven days, those symptoms go away. So if you can stabilize their progesterone during the last half of their luteal phase, and sometimes we would just do it for the entire luteal phase, just put them on a low dose of progesterone, all PMS symptoms vanish.

Andrew Huberman: Very interesting. I'll have to look up where the progesterone receptors are located in the brain. The Allen Brain Institute now has beautiful data of NCTU hybridization, which for folks that don't understand looking at RNA and where genes and proteins ought to be expressed in the human brain by using actual human brain tissue sections as opposed to just mice. So I'll take a look, I think, some insight into what that progesterone emotionality link might be and where it might exist neural circuit wise.

Peter Attia: So then when the estrogen and progesterone reach their nader again, that starts the cycle. So that cycle is happening over and over and over again. Okay, so it became well known in the 50s that, okay, a woman's going to stop menstruating at some point, her estrogen goes down.
Andrew Huberman: Let's talk about fitness and let's talk about how you can develop the optimal fitness protocols for you. So that includes what to do each day of the week and your fitness protocol across the week, and indeed across the month and the year and even year to year. When we had Dr. Andy Galpin on the podcast, he said something very important that we want to keep in mind today, which is concepts are few, methods are many, that is there are an infinite number of different programs and exercises and set and rep schemes and different runs and burpees and pushups, et cetera, et cetera that one can follow. However, there are really just a few basic concepts or principles of muscle physiology, of cardiovascular function, of connective tissue function that provide or set the basis for the adaptations that we call fitness or that lead to fitness. So I'm going to list those off now. We can talk about a fitness protocol that's really aimed mainly toward developing skill. That's one. Or speed. That's another. Or power, which is speed times strength, or specifically strength, or hypertrophy, growth of muscles, or endurance such as muscular endurance.

Andrew Huberman: Muscular endurance is, for instance, your ability to stay in a plank position or to do a wall sit, to sit on an invisible chair against a wall, or other forms of endurance like near pure anaerobic endurance. So a one minute sprint or less or a one minute all out cycling on stationary bike, this sort of thing, or endurance that occurs in the kind of 3 to 12 minute total duration range. So that might be sprints or high intensity interval type training. It could be an all out swim, it could be all out row. That's another form of endurance, taps into different fuel systems, different aspects of muscle physiology, et cetera. And then endurance that lasts 30 minutes or more, which is typically what people think about when they think about endurance. But of course, the other forms of endurance matter. So we've got skill, speed, power, strength, hypertrophy, muscular endurance, anaerobic endurance, what I would call 3 to 12 minute endurance, although it goes by other names as well, and 30 minutes or more endurance type exercise and adaptations.
Andrew Huberman: In fact, most of the time I can't even remember that they're on my face, they're so lightweight. However, they also can be worn anywhere, to work, to dinner, et cetera. They have a terrific aesthetics. Unlike a lot of other performance eyeglasses out there that you can only find in designs that really make people look like a cyborg. ROKA makes the cyborg versions, some people like those, but they also make versions of their eyeglasses and sunglasses with frames that you can wear out to dinner, to work, et cetera. If you'd like to try ROKA eyeglasses or sunglasses, go to roka.com. That's R-O-K-A .com and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order. Again, that's roka.com and enter the code Huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are customized to your unique sleep needs. Now, sleep is the fundamental layer that is the most important aspect of mental health, physical health and performance.

Andrew Huberman: I've said that before on this podcast, and I'm going to be saying it over and over again. If you're sleeping well, everything else is better, and if you're not sleeping well, everything else gets far worse. So sleep is vital, and sleeping on the correct mattress is absolutely vital. Helix understands this, and they have a brief quiz that you can take. So you simply go to their website, you take this quiz, ask you questions such as you tend to run hot or cold during the night, you tend to sleep on your back, your side or your stomach, or maybe you don't know, and they match you to a mattress that's ideal for your particular sleep needs. For me, that was the Dusk mattress, D-U-S-K. I've been sleeping on a Dusk mattress for well over a year now, and it's the best sleep I've ever had. If you like to try Helix Mattress, you can go to helixsleep.com/huberman. Take that brief two minute sleep quiz and they'll match you to a customized mattress for your sleep needs.

Andrew Huberman: You'll get up to $200 off all mattress orders and two free pillows. Again, if you're interested, you go to helixsleep.com/huberman for up to $200 off and two free pillows. The Huberman Lab podcast is now partnered with Momentous Supplements. To find the supplements we discuss on the Huberman Lab podcast, you can go to live Momentous spelled O-U-S, livemomentous.com/huberman, and I should just mention that the library of those supplements is constantly expanding. Again, that's livemomentous.com/huberman.
Andrew Huberman: Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you meet your health goals. Now, I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. One issue with a lot of blood tests and DNA tests out there, however, is that you get information back about hormones, blood lipids, et cetera, but you don't know what to do with that information.

Andrew Huberman: InsideTracker makes understanding all of that very easy and even better points to specific directives, that is things you can do in terms of your lifestyle, your nutrition, supplementation, et cetera, in order to bring those numbers related to metabolic factors, lipids, hormones, et cetera, into the ranges that are optimal for you, your immediate and long-term health. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off any of InsideTracker plans. That's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off. Today's episode is also brought to us by ROKA. ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are the absolute highest quality. The company was founded by two all-American swimmers from Stanford and everything about ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed with performance in mind.

Andrew Huberman: I've spent a lifetime working on the visual system, and I can tell you that your visual system has to contend with an enormous number of challenges in order for you to be able to see clearly. ROKA understands this and has designed their sunglasses and eyeglasses to be worn in any number of different conditions and for you to still be able to see with crystal clarity. Now, I wear eyeglasses at night, when I work or when I drive, and I wear sunglasses during the day. I don't wear sunglasses when I get my morning sunlight viewing, a practice that I'm absolutely religious about every single morning, but throughout the day, I'll wear sunglasses when I drive or if I'm heading into bright sunlight to protect my eyes. ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses are terrific because they were designed for performance, so they were designed for things like cycling and running, so they won't slip off your face if they get sweaty. They're extremely lightweight.
Andrew Huberman: What they saw was a large magnitude, for example, 52% less postprandial, that's after a meal, glucose excursion, So 52% less increase in blood glucose and 60%, six zero less hyper insulinemia, so reduced levels of insulin. They also, miraculously, observed that despite this being, again, a small muscle, 1% of the total muscle mass, so very small oxidative use, they saw big improvements in systemic metabolic regulation. So this is interesting and I think something that we should at least know about. I'm not aware that anyone's replicated this study yet. I know there's a ton of excitement about this study in the popular press, and if the data turn out to hold up, which I like to imagine they will, I can understand why there's so much excitement. What this means is that if you're somebody who cares about blood glucose regulation, you want to keep your metabolism running, please don't stop exercising, the other ways that you exercise. But if you're somebody who wants to maximize your health, doing these soleus pushups fairly continuously while seated is going to be beneficial. And in addition to that, I know that there are going to be people out there who, for instance, might be injured or you're traveling and you're stuck on a plane or you're in the classroom and you're forced to study all day or take notes all day.

Andrew Huberman: You're just not getting enough opportunity to get those steps that you want to take, whether or that's 10,000 or fewer or more, getting enough steps or movement. Maybe you don't have time to get out and do your run, or maybe you're also running, weightlifting and doing yoga classes and things of that sort, but you want to further improve your fitness, at least in terms of your metabolic health. This seems like a terrific, very low investment way to do it. Certainly zero cost. It does take a little bit of attention, so you have to divert your attention from other things you're doing to make sure that you're still doing these soleus pushups. I'm sure that many of you are going to have a lot of detailed questions such as how high did they lift the heel and did they contract the muscle very hard or not? Couple of things about that, they did not have subjects really contract the muscle hard.

Andrew Huberman: They did measure the angle of heel raise and it was anywhere from 10 to 15 degrees so they didn't have to go way, way up on their tippy toes or things of that sort. In any event, 270 minutes, four and a half hours of doing these soleus pushups is a lot, but by my read of the data and the rather significant, or I should say very significant effects that they observed on blood glucose regulation and metabolism, et cetera, seems to me that doing less would still be beneficial and that you don't necessarily have to do the full 270 minutes in order to get the benefits that they observed. More about the study includes the fact that the benefits they observed were very long lasting, as long as two hours after a meal, they could still see this improved blood glucose utilization. I don't know because I wasn't able to find it in the methods whether or not they were doing the soleus pushups while they were consuming blood sugar in this study.

Andrew Huberman: The point being that if you're somebody who cares about their fitness, this study is interesting, because what it means is that, again, if you are forced to be immobile or sitting longer than you would like, if you're stuck in a meeting or Zooms or class or on a plane, et cetera, or if you're simply trying to add a bit more fitness and metabolic health to your overall regimen, soleus pushups, at least to me, seem like a very low investment, simple, zero cost tool to improve your metabolic health. For those of you that want to peruse the study in more detail, we will provide a link to this paper published in iScience in the show note caption.
Andrew Huberman: This study had people continuously do soleus pushups and they looked at things like blood glucose utilization, they looked at metabolism and so on. Now, a couple of important things about this study before I tell you what they discovered, which was frankly pretty miraculous, almost hard to believe, and yet I believe the data looked to be collected quite well, and there are a lot of statistics and the study looks to be quite thorough. First of all, they used an equal number of male and female subjects. There were a wide range of body mass indices, okay? So this wasn't just super fit people or people that were purely sedentary and not fit. They used a wide variety of ages, time of day, people who tended to walk a lot or not walk a lot. They measured changes in metabolism and blood glucose utilization and people that had done these soleus pushups while seated in the laboratory, and I must say, they had them do these soleus pushups for quite a long while, continuously. So they had them do it for as long as 270 minutes total throughout the day. So if you divide that, that's four and a half hours, you might say, well, four and a half hours of lifting the heel and putting the heel down, lifting the heel, putting the heel down, that's a lot. But they didn't always do it continuously.

Andrew Huberman: They had some breaks in there. So this is the sort of thing that you could imagine you or other people could do while seated, while doing Zooms or while on calls or maybe even while eating, doing that sort of thing. Although I'm not suggesting that you constantly be focusing on soleus pushups throughout your life. The point is that people who did these soleus pushups experienced dramatic improvements in blood sugar regulation and in metabolism despite the fact that the soleus is just 1% of the total musculature. So here I'm going to read from the abstract about what they found, people who did these soleus pushups, despite being a tiny muscle and using very little local energy... In fact, they measured muscle glycogen, the burn or essentially the utilization of fuel within the muscle, and there was very little utilization of fuel within the soleus itself, and that's because the soleus has this unique property of needing to basically keep you going all day, walking all day or moving all day.
Andrew Huberman: Hyperinsulinemia is something associated with blood glucose that's too high because insulin goes up to essentially match the level of blood glucose. You don't also don't want to be hypoglycemic, you don't want to have blood sugar that's too low, and insulin is involved in both regulating peaks and troughs in blood sugar, blood glucose. So we can basically say, and this is very simple, but we can basically say that you don't want blood glucose to be elevated too much or for too long. That's not good. In fact, people who have diabetes because they don't make insulin, people who have type 1 diabetes do not make insulin at all, their blood glucose is so high that they actually have to take insulin in order to regulate otherwise their blood glucose can go so high that it can damage cells and damage organs. It can even kill people. People who have type 2 diabetes are so called insulin insensitive.

Andrew Huberman: They make insulin, but the receptors to insulin are not sensitive to it, and so they make more insulin than normally would be made and blood glucose isn't regulated properly, et cetera, et cetera. The take home message about blood glucose is that you want your blood glucose levels to go up when you eat, but not too high and you don't want them to stay elevated for too long. This study looked at how people who are largely sedentary or at least sitting can increase the utilization, the clearance of glucose from the bloodstream after eating, and they also looked at overall metabolism. For people, get this, that were using just that 1% of muscle, the soleus, by doing what they call a soleus pushup. So the soleus pushup can be described very simply as if you're sitting down with your knee bent at approximately right angle, like a square corner, and pushing up, or I should say lifting your heel while pushing down on your toe and contracting the calf muscle as it were, and then lowering the heel and then in lifting that heel again, lowering the heel, lifting the heel again, each one of those is what they call a soleus pushup.
Andrew Huberman: Before we dive into today's content about fitness and fitness protocols, I want to tell you about a brand new study that is very exciting and frankly very unusual. This is a study that was published out of the University of Houston, examining what I would call a micro exercise or a micro movement. It's a very small movement of a very small portion of your body, in fact, just 1% of your musculature, that when it's performed continuously while seated has, at least what they report, are very dramatic positive changes in terms of blood sugar utilization and metabolism. So the title of this study is "A potent physiological method to magnify and sustain soleus oxidative metabolism improves glucose and lipid regulation." This study was published in iScience, and as I mentioned earlier, it is getting a lot of attention and it's very unusual. Without going into all the details of this study, let me just briefly give you a little bit of the background.

Andrew Huberman: First of all, you have a muscle called the soleus. The soleus muscle is a more or less wide flat muscle that sits beneath what most people think of as their calf, although it's part of the calf muscle. The other portion of the calf is called the gastrocnemius. The soleus sits below that. Now, the soleus muscle is a unique muscle because it's largely slow twitch muscle fibers. It's designed to be used continuously over and over again for stabilizing your body when you're standing upright, for walking. This is a muscle that's designed to contract over and over and over again. In fact, you could walk all day on this muscle and most likely it would not get sore. You probably done that and it did not get sore. In contrast, a muscle like your bicep or your tricep, if I were to have you perform hundreds or thousands of repetitions, even with a very lightweight one pound weight or a two pound weight, eventually it would fatigue. You would feel a sort of a burn there.

Andrew Huberman: It's a very unusual set of muscles to use repeatedly. But the soleus is an unusual muscle in that it really is designed to be used continuously. Now, this study was focused on how people who sit a lot of the day and don't have the opportunity for a lot of physical movement or maybe who don't even exercise at all can improve their metabolism and glucose utilization. Without going into a deep dive about glucose utilization, because we've done the deep dive on this podcast, episodes such as metabolism, et cetera, you can look those up at hubermanlab.com. They're all timestamped and available there. Anytime you eat, your blood sugar goes up to some extent. So your blood glucose, as it's called, goes up to some extent. And then insulin is a hormone that's used to essentially chaperone and sequester and use that blood glucose or it's basically the idea is you don't want blood glucose to go too high.
Andrew Huberman: Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today we are discussing fitness. Fitness, of course, is vitally important for cardiovascular health, for strength, for endurance, for lifespan, for healthspan. I can't think of anyone out there that wouldn't want to have healthy hormonal function, healthy cardiovascular function, to live a long time and to feel vital, that is to have a long healthspan as well as a long lifespan. Fitness and fitness protocols are tremendously powerful for developing all of that. However, despite there being an enormous amount of information out there on the internet and in books and elsewhere, it can be a bit overwhelming. So today's episode is really designed to synthesize science based tools that we've covered on the podcast, some with expert guests like Dr. Andy Galpin or Dr. Peter Attia, or world renowned Movement specialist Ido Portal, or physiotherapist and strength and conditioning coach, Jeff Cavaliere.

Andrew Huberman: We've had all of them as guests on the podcast, and each and every one of them provided a wealth of knowledge in terms of the various things that you can do to optimize very specific or multiple aspects of fitness. Today, we're going to do something a little bit different than usual. Typically on the Huberman Lab podcast, I offer mechanism upfront or first, and then we talk about protocols that you can use that really lean on those science and science based mechanisms. Today I'm going to describe a specific protocol that serves as a general template that anyone, in fact, everyone can use in order to maximize all aspects of fitness. So that includes endurance, strength, flexibility, hypertrophy, aesthetic changes, et cetera. However, this general framework can also be modified, that is customized to your particular needs. So if you're somebody who really wants to build more strength or bigger muscles, you can change the protocol and the overall program according to that. And I'll talk about very specific ways to do that. Or if you're somebody who really just wants to maintain strength, but you want to build endurance, we'll talk about that. And of course, we will cover real life issues, such as should you train if you are sleep deprived, what about food?

Andrew Huberman: When should you eat? What if you haven't eaten and you're hungry? Should you still train? Et cetera, et cetera. We're going to cover all of that, again, in the context of this, what I would call foundational template of fitness. Now, this foundational template of fitness is something that I personally use. In fact, I've used it for over three decades, hard to believe that I'm that old, but I just recently turned 47, and I still use this basic protocol or template across the week and modify it according to what my particular goals are that year, that month, even that day, because I, like you, live in the real world and sometimes I've been traveling or I miss a workout, yes, it does happen, or life isn't organized in exactly the way that I need to in order to have everything go according to the protocol that's on paper. So we're going to discuss real world issues and how to work with the real world issues in order to get the most out of your fitness program. And again, by the end of today's program, I can assure you, you will have a template protocol that you can build up from, build out, change and modify, and that will really serve your fitness goals according to the science and what peer-reviewed studies and the experts that appeared on this podcast and other podcasts really tell us is best and optimal for our fitness.

Andrew Huberman: I'm pleased to announce that the Huberman Lab podcast has now launched a premium channel. I want to be very clear that the Huberman Lab podcast will continue to be released every Monday at zero cost to consumer, and there will be no change in the format of these podcasts.
Andrew Huberman: Each and every one of these requires different principles, different concepts in order to improve, say your muscular strength or your hypertrophy or both. However, there's a general theme that sits beneath all adaptations leading to fitness, and that's what we're really going to set down as the base layer, the foundation of everything we talk about today. And that's that we need to think about what are the modifiable variables? Again, I'm borrowing directly from the episode with Dr. Andy Galpin. He was the one that said, modifiable variables are the key thing to think about. What are you going to modify? What are you going to change in order to increase one or some of the various things I listed off before, skill, speed, power, strength, hypertrophy, endurance, et cetera, et cetera. And some of the key concepts that emerge from that discussion are that we need to think about progressive overload.

Andrew Huberman: Normally when people hear about progressive overload, they think about adding more weight to a bar or picking up heavier dumbbells, but that could also be progressive overload in the context of running up a hill of steeper incline or running a little bit faster or a little bit further and so on and so forth. Now, as I promised earlier, today we are not going to drill into each and every one of the mechanisms that underlie the different adaptations that are going to develop speed and strength and endurance, et cetera, because that was covered in the podcast with Dr. Andy Galpin and the other podcast with experts that I mentioned earlier. And we again, will provide links to those podcasts if you want to drill into those mechanisms.

Andrew Huberman: Instead, what we are going to do is we're going to start with a program that essentially is designed for you to maximize all aspects of fitness to the extent that you can simultaneously maximize all aspects of fitness, but then to change or modify that protocol so that if you want to build up more, for instance, strength and you want to just hold onto the endurance you have, you don't want to build endurance, at least not in that week or that month, you can do that. Or if you want to improve your endurance while maintaining your strength, you can do that. And so on and so forth. Most people, I do believe, would like a combination of strength and endurance and flexibility and maybe even hypertrophy, particularly for certain muscle groups that maybe are not as well developed as other muscle groups.

Andrew Huberman: They want to bring balance to their physique, both for sake of aesthetics and for sake of health and for sake of general functioning, to maybe even to eliminate pain, the protocol that I'm going to describe really works as a foundational template for that as well.
Peter Attia: Yeah, if you look at the literature on this, it's going to tell you it's going to differentiate power lifting from weightlifting. In other words. Yeah, you do need to be kind of moving against a very heavy load. Now, again, that can look very different depending on your level of experience. Like, I really like deadlifting. Now. I can count the number of days left in my life when I'm going to want to do sets over 400, but I'll pick and choose the days that I do. But I grew up doing those things. I'm comfortable with those movements. If I had a 60 year old woman who's never lifted weights in her life, who we now have to get lifting, I mean, we could get her to Deadlift, but I think I wouldn't make perfect the enemy of good. I'd be happy to put her on a leg press machine and just get her doing that. It's not as pure a movement as a deadlift, but who cares, right? We can still put her at a heavy load for her and do so safely.

Peter Attia: Now, that said, there was a study that was done in Australia and hopefully we can find a link to it. There's a video on YouTube that actually kind of has the pi sort of walking through the results. I could send it to you.

Andrew Huberman: Okay. Yeah.

Peter Attia: And it's just amazing. They took a group of older women, they look like they're in their 60s or 70s, who had never lifted weights in their life, who had osteopenia, and some probably already had osteoporosis, and they basically just put them on a strength training protocol. And it is remarkable to watch these women. They're doing good mornings, they're doing deadlifts, they're picking heavy things up off the ground. I think one woman was picking up god, I want to say she was like, picking like 50, 60 kilos up off the ground. I mean, just staggering sums of weight for these women who have never done anything. And their bone health is improving at this age. So the goal, frankly, is to just never get to the point where you have to do this for the first time. Strength training is such an essential part of our existence that it's never too late to start, but you should peter, stop.
Andrew Huberman: In terms of frequency of blood testing, if somebody feels pretty good and is taking a number of steps exercise, nutrition, et cetera, to try and extend lifespan and improve healthspan, is once a year frequent enough? And should a 20 year old start getting blood work done just to get a window into what's going on? Assuming that they can afford it or their insurance can cover it?

Peter Attia: Yeah, I mean, look, I certainly think everybody should be screened early in life because if you look at what's the single most prevalent genetic driver of atherosclerosis is, LP little A. So unfortunately, most physicians don't know what LP little A is. And yet somewhere between eight and 12% of the population has a high enough and depending on who you I had a recent guest on my podcast who suggested it could be as high as 20% have a high enough LP Little A that it is contributing to atherosclerosis. So to not want to know that when it's genetically determined, right? This is something that you're born with this, and you only need to really check it once. Why we wouldn't want to know that in a 20 year old when it can contribute to a lot of the early atherosclerosis we see in people, it's leaving money on the table, in my opinion. The frequency with which you need to test really comes down to the state of interventions.

Peter Attia: I don't think it makes sense to just do blood tests for the sake of doing blood tests. There has to be kind of a reason. Is something changing? A blood test is, for the most part, a static intervention. It's a look at a window in time, and there's benefit in having a few of those over the course of a year if you're unsure about a level. So if something comes back and it doesn't look great, yeah, it might make sense just to recheck it without reacting to it. But typically in patients, we might check blood two to four times a year, but we're also probably doing things in there to now check, like, hey, we gave this drug. Did it have the desired outcome? You put on 3 of muscle and lost 3 of fat. Did it have the desired outcome?
Andrew Huberman: We partnered with Momentous for several important reasons. First of all, they ship internationally because we know that many of you are located outside of the United Statins. Second of all, and perhaps most important, the quality of their supplements is second to none, both in terms of purity and precision of the amounts of the ingredients. Third, we've really emphasized supplements that are single ingredient supplements and that are supplied in dosages that allow you to build a supplementation protocol that's optimized for cost, that's optimized for effectiveness, and that you can add things and remove things from your protocol in a way that's really systematic and scientific. If you'd like to see the supplements that we partner with Momentous on, you can go to Livemomentous.com Huberman. There you'll see those supplements. And just keep in mind that we are constantly expanding the library of supplementation available through Momentous on a regular basis. Again. That's livemomentous.com.

Andrew Huberman: Huberman.
Andrew Huberman: Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where. We discuss science and sciencebased tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today. My guest is Dr. Peter Attia. Dr. Attia is a physician who's focused on nutritional supplementation based behavioral prescription drug and other inter ventures that promote health span and lifespan. His expertise spans from exercise physiology to sleep physiology, emotional and mental health, and pharmacology. Today we talk about all those areas of health, starting with the very basics such as how to evaluate one's own health status and how to define one's health trajectory. We also talk about the various sorts of interventions that one can take in order to optimize vitality while also extending longevity, that is, lifespan. Dr.

Andrew Huberman: Artilla is uniquely qualified to focus on the complete depth and breadth of topics that we cover, and indeed these are the same topics that he works with his patients on in his clinic every day. Dr. Attia earned his Bachelor of Science in Mechanical Engineering and Applied Mathematics and his MD Stanford University School of Medicine Medicine. He then went on to train at Johns Hopkins Hospital in General Surgery, one of the premier hospitals in the world, where he was the recipient of several prestigious awards, including Resident of the Year. He's been an author on comprehensive reuse of general surgery. He spent two years at the National Institutes of Health as a Surgical Oncology Fellow at the National Cancer Institute, where his work focused on immune based therapies for melanoma in the fields of science and medicine. It is well understood that we are much the product of our mentors and the mentoring we receive. Dr.

Andrew Huberman: Attia has trained with some of the best and most innovative lipidologists, endocrinologists, gynecologists, sleep, physiologists and longevity scientists in the United States and Canada. So the expertise that funnels through him and that he shares with us today is really harnessed from the best of the best and his extensive training and expertise. By the end of today's episode, you will have answers to important basic questions such as should you have blood work? How often should you do blood work? What specific things should you be looking for on that blood work that are either counterintuitive or not often discussed and yet that immediately and in the long term influence your lifespan and health span? We talk about hormone health and hormone therapies for both men and women. We talk about drug therapies that can influence the mind as well as the body. And of course, we talk about supplementation, nutrition, exercise, and predictors of lifespan and healthspan.

Andrew Huberman: It is an episode rich with information. For some of you. You may want to get out a. Pen and paper in order to take notes. For others of you that learn Peter simply by listening, I just want to remind you that we have timestamped all this information so that you can go back to the specific topics most of interest to you, I'm pleased to announce that the Huberman Lab podcast is now partnered with Momentous Supplements.
Andrew Huberman: You have circuit in your brain, right?

Duncan French: You just plan like, you know where all the targets are going to be here. It's a moving target because you might be just hanging out, doing some general prep work, and then you might get a short notice fight. They give you a quick call and it's in six weeks or five weeks, and, okay, I've got to ramp everything up really quickly. So that's a real challenge in terms of just managing all these different components of mixed martial arts alone. To come back to your question, the other thing which is truly fascinating about these individuals is just their mental resilience. And again, we've touched on it in the talk. But the ability to do what they do on a daily basis, to look at all the different skill sets that they have to try and engage in and bring into their training to do that and embrace the grind, embrace the process of just learning the physical side of our sport is unprecedented. But the mental side, we have a funny saying.

Duncan French: We always say it's 90% mental apart from the 60%, that's physical. So it's just more and more and more. And these guys ability to just do that on a daily basis is very impressive. Like their resilience, their internal drive, and their resilience is really impressive to see.

Andrew Huberman: All the fires I've met here have been really terrific. It's interesting, every time I meet a fighter, how often I shouldn't be surprising, where they're often very soft spoken, right? Always extremely polite. And fighting is such a it comes from a very primitive portion of the brain, right? But a large portion of the brain nonetheless.

Duncan French: But I think that's another skill is that switch, and again, that's the recoverability piece, right. You cannot be type A or you cannot be like, supercharged 24 hours a day because you're going to just fry your system, right? And I think that's something else where we're really trying to manage this whole process, be it through nutritional interventions, be it through education, around sleep, be it through training, program management, be it through psychological interventions. You could look at fighters and say these guys are go like they're red alert and they'll run through a brick wall. But actually, again, their ability to turn it on and off means that they can do what they do. They can bring it down and be very normal, very polite, very accommodating, maybe.

Andrew Huberman: Even better than most people.
Andrew Huberman: Interesting, you mentioned lactate. So it seems still a bit controversial as to what actually triggers hypertrophy. You hear about lactate build up or people, the common language is the muscle gets thorne and then repairs. But I don't know, does the muscle actually tear?

Duncan French: I mean, microtrain, okay, microtrauma disruption within the muscle tissue for sure.

Andrew Huberman: Interesting. And we're talking now about non drug assisted people. Let's just say, let's define our terms here, whose testosterone levels are within the range of somewhere between 300 and 1500 or whatever 1200. Because it does seem that athletes who take high levels of exogenous androgens can do more work and just get protein synthesis from just doing work. I've seen these guys in the gym, the whole tail signs are not that hard to spot, where they're just doing a ton of volume, not necessarily moving that much weight, they're just bringing blood into the tissue and then they're eating a ton of protein, presumably because they're basically in puberty part 15, right. They got on their 15th round of puberty, where during puberty, you are a protein synthesis machine. To me, that's pretty clear about puberty. Interesting, because I know the audience likes to try protocols. So you described a protocol very nicely. What about day to day recovery?

Andrew Huberman: I mean, can the workout that you described as intense but short, how many days a week can the typical person do that and sustain progress?

Duncan French: Yeah, I mean, I think that comes back to your training age and your training history. Obviously, there's a resilience and a robustness with an incremental training age. So that's not a protocol that I would advise anyone to go out and start tomorrow.

Andrew Huberman: They'll be mopping them off the gym.

Duncan French: Floor, but at the same time, it's also relative. Right. So 80% of your maximum at a young training age is still 80% versus been training ten years, it's still 80%. But, yes, the mechanical load is going to be significant, it's just more tonnage. Right. But yeah, I think a protocol like that we would look at two times a week, something that's pretty intensive like that. Because again, it comes back to the point you make, is that you really need to be, for want a better term, suffering a little bit through that type of protocol, both in terms of the challenge of the load, but also being able to tolerate the the metabolic stress that you're exposed to. It's it's, it's, you know, a bit of a sicko feeling right. Because of the lactate that you're driving up. So I wouldn't promote an athlete doing that type of modality multiple, multiple times, unless you are from the realms of bodybuilding and then that's the sole purpose of what you're trying to achieve.

Duncan French: Most athletes in most sports have diverse requirements in terms of outcomes that they're trying to achieve. They're not just targeting muscle growth. Muscle growth is a conduit to increase strength, increased power, increased speed, obviously. So, yes, trying to get bigger cross sectional area of a muscle means that we can produce more force into the ground or wherever it may be if we're a locomotive athlete. But usually sports, men and women are not just purely seeking muscle growth, they look for different facets of muscle endurance or maximal muscle power, muscle strength. So then you've got to be very creative in how you build the workout. If it's a bodybuilder. Absolutely. They're chasing muscle growth and they're going to do so with these types of protocols, which sees high intensities and high volumes of workload on a pretty regular. Basis.

Duncan French: If it's just somebody, a weekend warrior that wants to keep in shape and look good, I would say two times a week for a really challenging workout like that, and then flex the other types of workouts within the week to have more of a volume emphasis where you reduce the intensity. And you might just look at larger rep ranges from twelve to 15 to 20. Another workout where you're looking at reducing the volume but increasing the intensity and really trying to drive a different stimulus to give you more endpoints of success.

Andrew Huberman: Great. No, that's really informative along the lines of androgens and intensity.
Andrew Huberman: If I understand correctly, you want to create a metabolic stress.

Duncan French: Absolutely.

Andrew Huberman: So the way that I've been training slow and lazy is not necessarily the best way to go. I could, in theory, do a 45 or 60 minutes session where I pack in more work per unit time. I'm not going to be able to, quote, unquote, perform as well. I won't be able to lift as much. I have to unweight the bar between sets or maybe even during sets if I have someone who could do that. But it sounds like that's the way to go. So the old adage of high intensity short duration is probably the way to go.

Duncan French: Correct? In layman's terms, if the same objective, the same training goal is just muscle tissue growth, and we're not talking about maximal strength or any of those type of parameters, we're just talking about growing muscle. If there's an athlete A and they do six sets of ten with two minutes rest, and there's athlete B that does six sets of ten with three minutes rest, athlete A will likely see the highest muscle gains, muscle hypertrophy gains, because of the metabolic stimulus that they're driving with the shorter rest periods.

Andrew Huberman: Interesting, for all the years that I've spent exploring exercise science and trying to get this information from the internet in various places, that this is the first time it's ever been told to me clearly. So basically I need to put my ego aside and I need to not focus so much on getting as many reps with a given weight and keep the rest restricted about two minutes, get the work in and then I'll derive the benefits.

Duncan French: I mean, you've absolutely nailed it, to be honest. And again, if you think about human nature and how we approached, we're inherently lazy, right? As humans, we want to take that rest, we want to take the time out to recover and feel refreshed. But we're trying to create a training stimulus. We're trying to create a very specific stimulus internal to the body and that is often driven by the metabolic environment at that moment in time. Now, if we allow the meticulbolic environment to change by extending the rest periods, we're not going to see as beneficial gains at the end of it.

Andrew Huberman: Very interesting.

Duncan French: It is very much a motivational and ego thing. Rather than saying, okay, I'm going to push my loads as high as I can and really challenge maximal strength, do fewer repetitions, take longer periods of time, it's a completely different approach to training, it's a different end goal.
Peter Attia: Right. So here's where we still struggle. Right? If it were up to me, I'd prefer for a woman's HRT to be provided by her GYN because we want to be able to work in partnership with the GYN who we would like to see an endometrial ultrasound done every year. Some would argue that's overkill, but we think sheep is having a PAP smear every year as well. So if we're looking at the cervix, we want to look at the endometrium. We want to make sure the lining isn't too thick. The other thing I should say, Andrew, is today we now realize that not all women can tolerate pardon me, progesterone. So you have to be careful. So assuming again, a woman still has her uterus, the estrogen solves most of the problems. But then you have to decide, can she tolerate the progesterone? And it needs to be, if given systemically, like 100 to 200 milligrams. And for some women, that is a life saving intervention. I mean, they start sleeping better, their hair gets thicker, they feel better. But for some women, it literally drives them crazy.

Peter Attia: It's probably the reciprocal of what we were seeing in the case of women with PMS. So in those situations we say, great, we're done with oral progesterone. We just use a progesterone coded IUD. So then you get the local progesterone in the uterus for protection and the systemic estrogen.

Andrew Huberman: Fascinating. What about oral contraception in women? So the use of estrogen chronically through people's college years or twenty s, thirty s, maybe even teens. Who knows what's known about the long term effects, if any?

Peter Attia: I got to be honest with you, I don't think I know enough to comment on it. It's not something that really impacts my patient population, at least in what I see. More women are using Iuds for contraception than OCS. I mean, we use OCS sometimes in women who are pre menopausal for symptomatic control, but we'll typically use like a low, low estrogen. So a very low synthetic estrogen, which I don't like using these very much, but if it's the only thing that we can get to control certain symptoms and we'll use it like half her cycle, but it's typically not something we're that experienced with.

Andrew Huberman: What about testosterone? Because you mentioned that nanogram per mill, when you set everything to the same I guess it's nanogram per deciliter, as it would be to kind of normalize Peter Mole. Right? Yeah. And so what Peter was pointing out before is that you look at your charts and they're all in these different measures, and so when you normalize, testosterone is actually higher than estrogen in women. That's a surprise to me. Do you prescribe testosterone therapy to women ever?

Peter Attia: We do sometimes, but I do it with much more caution because I don't have the data. Right. What we'll say is, look, we're now really outside of an area where I can point to a lot of data. Like when it comes to estrogen and progesterone, I'll happily go toe to toe with anybody who wants to make the case that it's dangerous. Similarly, when it comes to using testosterone in men, I'll spend all day and I can go through that literature until the other person cries and wants to just call uncle. Right.

Andrew Huberman: And then you prescribe them testosterone when.

Peter Attia: It comes to estrogen and testosterone in women, don't have that data, and I'd love to see that trial done. So what's the sweet spot? How do we reconcile that? So it's not something I consider standard. And basically, if a woman is if her testosterone, first of all, is staggeringly low, and again, even though her testosterone is low compared to a male, we still have a range. So if it's really at the bottom of that range, she's really having difficulty putting on muscle mass and really complaining of low libido. I think in that situation we'll go ahead and use topical testosterone and replace her to a level that is still physiologically normal.

Andrew Huberman: Yeah, that's key, because when people hear HRT, they think about super. Physiological seems to be the term.

Peter Attia: Yeah. I've never seen a single symptom in a single woman that I've put testosterone on in terms of like, acne, body hair, things like that. Those are real symptoms that you have to be aware of. But clitoral enlargement and things like that, that doesn't happen under physiologic normal conditions.

Andrew Huberman: I'd love to talk a little bit about hormone hormone replacement therapy. Men.
Andrew Huberman: In fact, that's a principle that you'll hear me talk about later when I talk about training other muscle groups for strength and hypertrophy. So now you know approximately how long to train, you might be somebody who can get away with training for an hour and a half, and that won't impede your recovery. For me, that really starts to impede my recovery. Also, if I'm staying on task, that 60 minute limit really works well for me. Do I occasionally train for 75 minutes? Yes, because if I'm waiting for a piece of equipment, sometimes I have to just wait longer. So that happens. But I really try and keep the total duration of the workout shorter. How many sets and reps and rest intervals? Well, that was covered by Dr. Andy Galpin as well. Without getting into the total science, here's a brief summary of how to structure that. It's pretty clear that if you're going to do lower repetitions and heavier weight, that you're going to want to do a bit more volume.

Andrew Huberman: I know that this spits in the face of what a lot of people think, but so if you're going to do five sets of five, and I would consider five repetitions low repetition range, heavier weight, and if you're going to train with higher repetitions, you can do fewer sets. That certainly works for me. I generally follow a program where for about a month, so three to four weeks, I will do all my resistance training in the repetition range of about four to eight repetitions. So that's rather heavy. A few more sets. So it might be anywhere from three to four sets per exercise. Again, still just two exercises. And longer rest between sets, anywhere from two minutes to maybe even four minutes if it's really heavy leg work. And then for the next month, switch to repetition range that's closer to 8 to 12, maybe even 15 repetitions per set, but do fewer sets overall, so maybe just two to three sets per exercise. Again, just two exercises per muscle group typically. And shorten the rest between sets so that it's more in the 90 second, maybe even as short as 60 second rest between sets, but typically 90 seconds to about two minutes or two and a half minutes. So basically it's one month heavier, the next month, slightly lighter, although I wouldn't say lighter, I would say moderate weight and moderate rep range.

Andrew Huberman: That tends to work well for me. It also adheres to a principal that came up during the discussion, again, with Dr. Andy Galpin, that for hypertrophy, you really can use repetition ranges anywhere from 5 to 30, three zero, reps. But he emphasized changing the repetition ranges in order to offset boredom. Frankly, I like to train heavier. I enjoy training in the four to eight rep range. However, I notice that if I do that for more than four weeks in a row and I don't switch over to training in the 8 to 12, maybe in 15 repetition range for about a month, well then I can't make continuous progress. I start to actually lose ground. But by switching back and forth, I actually can make continuous progress at least across the year. So I hope that that principle, or I should say that protocol was communicated clearly. It works very well, I assure you. Does that mean that I never get 10 repetitions on a week when I'm supposed to train in the four to eight repetition range? No.

Andrew Huberman: Occasionally I'll venture up into the 10 repetition range, but I really try and cluster the low repetition work for about a month, again, across all workouts and all exercises and the slightly higher, I would even say moderate repetition work across to the next month. One thing that you'll notice since we are talking about total fitness programming is that during the months where you are doing moderate repetitions, you'll notice that your endurance work will actually be facilitated. And I do not think that's a coincidence. In fact, it's not a coincidence. It's because when you are training very heavy or in the heavier range, lower repetitions, et cetera, you're tapping into different processes in those muscles. So when you head out for that long Sunday hike, or as you'll soon hear, whereas on Friday you're going to do high intensity interval training, what you'll notice is during certain months of weight training, when you're training more heavy, those workouts will feel, literally will feel different than they will during the months when you're doing moderate repetition work.

Andrew Huberman: I am not a competitive athlete. I'm not running races or triathlons like some of my friends. I'm very impressed by them. I'm really just trying to get overall cardiovascular fitness, overall strength, overall hypertrophy where I need it, maintain muscle size, et cetera, in muscle groups where I'm just trying to maintain. That's really my goal. So I'm not trying to optimize any of these workouts for any one performance feature, but in a little bit, we'll talk about how you can change various aspects, that is, variables of these protocols, in order to say, for instance, really emphasize hypertrophy or really emphasize endurance.
Andrew Huberman: Now I realize a lot of people don't want a large neck, and I totally understand for aesthetic reasons why they don't want that. It's kind of interesting actually, if you think about it, that people who have a large neck are often told they have no neck. People say that guy has no neck or they have no neck when in fact they're referring to the fact that they have a very large neck. I don't know how that came to be. Somebody put in the comments why that is, how come when people have a big neck they refer to it as no neck. So why do I train the neck? I train the neck for a couple of reasons. One is years ago I had an accent where I actually fell off a roof and I'd been training my neck at that time for a sport that I was involved in and I walked away from it with a sore neck but not a broken neck. And I thought, wow, it's really great that I have been training my neck. In addition to that, I was once in a car accident where I was parked...

Andrew Huberman: I just bought the car, was my first new car purchased, parked in that car with my mother, my grandfather in the backseat at the red light and someone rammed into us at full speed. Now fortunately, none of us were hurt. We were all rattled. And once again, I was very sore in my back and in my neck. But I think one of the reasons why I was able to essentially walk away from that, I didn't have any sustained damage was because I trained my neck, but I started training my neck for sport and I continue to train my neck because I notice when I don't train my neck I start getting shoulder issues. And if you talk to an excellent physiologist like Dr. Kelly Starrett of The Ready State, is an excellent channel, you can find them on all the social media and standard channels or you talk to anyone out there who really understands the strength of the torso and the upper body and even the back.

Andrew Huberman: What you learn is that, of course, being the upper portion of the spine, stabilizing your neck is very important. Now, training the neck can be a little bit detailed and specific and even dangerous if you do it wrong. Again, Jeff Cavaliere has a terrific set of videos on training the neck properly. I know a lot of people out there might think neck bridges and I used to do neck bridges. I occasionally still sneak in a neck bridge here or there, although I don't recommend it because in discussions with Jeff, he will tell you, and it's true, that the discs eventually go and you can run into serious issues from doing bridges and it doesn't happen gradually so you can't notice it happening. It just happens suddenly. So I might occasionally do a neck bridge, but in general I'll train neck by wrapping a plate in a towel so that I don't end up with an imprint of the weight value on my head or face. And then moving the neck from side to side or front or back, and again, we'll provide a link to those videos.

Andrew Huberman: It's a terrific set of videos that describe how to train your neck properly and safely. So even if you're not trying to grow your neck, you definitely want to make sure that you use some light weights to make sure that your neck is stable and upright. And I say stable and upright because it's very clear that for reasons related to texting and staring down at computers and related to weak neck relative to the rest of the muscles that stabilize the spine, a lot of people, their default stance or their default posture is with chin forward and that's not good. Not only is it aesthetically not good, but it also can create all sorts of issues related to back pain and headaches and things of that sort. This is a real thing, training your neck allows you to stand upright, sit upright. I even believe that it allows you to do things like public speaking or have conversations with people on the street in a way where you are front facing as opposed to looking down.
Andrew Huberman: He also has excellent programs on his athleanx.com site. but certainly has a lot of excellent protocols on his YouTube and Instagram. But on YouTube you can put in his name and any muscle group that you want to train. And he has some terrific videos describing exercise choice and other features of exercise parameters. Again, a peak contraction or shortening of the muscle, peak contraction exercise and a stretching exercise. And so for the back, one might say, okay, a seated row or a bent over row or a dumbbell row where the elbow is brought behind the torso for a peak contraction movement. And then for more of a stretching movement might be something like a chin up or a pull-up. And as I say this, I understand that stretching and peak contraction aren't the exact terms that one would use if they were a physiotherapist or a strength and conditioning coach, but I think for the typical person who's trying to generate strength and hypertrophy in those muscles or maintain strength and hypertrophy in those muscles, this kind of nomenclature way of describing it at least should be clear and even efficient. And just to remind you, as with the leg workout, the total duration of the torso workout is going to be 50 to 60 minutes after a brief warmup.

Andrew Huberman: The sets and repetitions are going to be dictated in the same way that I described earlier. So for about a month it's going to be more sets. So anywhere from three to five sets in the lower repetition range, so four to eight repetitions, so that's going to be heavier weights and longer rest as I described earlier, the rest intervals. And then for the next month it's going to be moderate repetitions, fewer sets, the same way I described earlier. And if you want more details on all of that, you can find that in the newsletter related to the optimal or foundational fitness protocol that you can access at hubermanlab.com. One thing I should note about the Wednesday torso workout is that I am a big believer in training the, what I believe is the highly avoided, or at least overlooked but vitally important aspect of total body stability, strength and safety, really, safety, which is the neck.
Andrew Huberman: I could be for aesthetic reasons, but also for balancing strength and for health of, and the integrity of the joints, et cetera. And in addition to that, by training a bunch of different muscle groups together, you have the opportunity to get the more systemic hormonal effects and metabolic effects that occur when you're not just training one muscle group and isolating that one muscle group, but rather training a bunch of muscle groups together. So Wednesday I train torso and I do that in push pull fashion just for kind of time efficiency. Sometimes that means doing a pushing exercise and then a pulling exercise. Sometimes it might even mean doing a set of pushing and then a set of pulling and going back and forth. However, if you're in a gym, in particular, a crowded gym, please don't be one of those people that colonizes multiple pieces of equipment and says, I'm working there, I'm working there, and that can be quite a dance and it can be hard to orchestrate a workout like that. So sometimes it will be starting off with a set of shoulder presses and then doing all your sets of those and then moving to your chin ups and then moving perhaps back to shoulders and realizing, ah, oh, someone's on the machine that I wanted, or using the equipment that I wanted, so I'll just finish up the pulling, I'll finish up the back work and then go in to the push.

Andrew Huberman: I don't obsess over the alternation in any kind of strict way. I really just try and get the muscles of the torso trained. And again, it's two exercises per muscle group. And one of those exercises is going to be something where there's, I realize this isn't physiologically accurate, but a shortening of the muscle or where they, at the end of the movement, the muscle is under maximal contraction. I could throw out some names of exercises just for purpose of understanding. So this would be like cable crossovers for the chest, the peak contraction is at the end, whereas something like an incline press, there's more of a stretch provided it's done over a full range of motion at the beginning of the movement. So again, something where there's a stretch and something where there's a peak contraction. For the shoulders, it's a little bit harder to do, although there are ways to do that. And Jeff Cavaliere has excellent workouts available, zero cost, on YouTube.
Andrew Huberman: Okay, so long endurance on Sunday, leg resistance training on Monday and on Tuesday, heat cold contrast. That brings us to Wednesday. And on Wednesday we get back to a resistance training workout. And the resistance training workout that I emphasize on Wednesday is one in which you train your torso. Yes, literally your torso. I know this is counter to this so-called bro science of bro splits. I don't know who originated that term, it's a terrible term. It essentially alienates anyone who's not a bro or considers themselves a bro. But in any case, this is not about training chest or back or shoulders. In fact, it's really about strengthening the muscles of the torso and of course includes the chest and the shoulders and the back. And I'm sure, as I say this, a number of people out there who are obsessed with hypertrophy and muscle growth and filling out their shirts or whatever it may be, are thinking, oh no, this is just kind of all around fitness. But no, the point is, on Wednesday you train your torso and that's going to involve some pushing, so that's, for you that might include some training of things like bench presses or incline presses as well as shoulder presses or lateral raises, things for the shoulders as well as for the back, some pulling exercises.

Andrew Huberman: These could be bent over rows or chin-ups or pull-ups. Again, there are enormous number of exercise for each and every one of these muscle groups. Now, I believe there's a clear benefit to training all these muscle groups together on the same day, because much in the same way that training legs all on one day can lead to these systemic effects because they're large muscle groups, working both the pushing muscles and the pulling muscles of the torso on one day, at least in the context of this program, is very time efficient, and tends to wick out into a number of different dimensions of health that at least I'm interested in and I think a lot of other people are interested in. What are those? Well, let's think again, I want to be strong in not just my legs, but my upper body. I also may want, may want to engage some hypertrophy, to grow certain muscle groups in order to create a sense of balance.
Andrew Huberman: You can actually download those protocols very easily without even signing up if you just want to access them straight off. So Tuesday is really about recovery and about getting some additional cardiovascular benefits from heat cold contrast. One other thing that's built into the rationale for doing a lot of heat and cold on one day as opposed to doing it every day... Well, in addition to it being a little bit more convenient because certainly some people don't access to heat and cold sauna and cold dunks et cetera every day. So maybe getting to do that one day is more accessible or feasible. But in addition to that, it's very clear that while there are benefits to doing sauna often, and we talked about this in the deliberate heat episode and the episode with Dr. Rhonda Patrick when she was a guest on this podcast, it's also clear that if you do sauna seldom, that is once a week, but you do a lot of it on one day, so in this case, it's an hour, if it's, remember, it's one more, it's three to five rounds of 20 minutes of sauna followed by about 5 minutes of cold or so, by doing that all on one day, the peer reviewed research that's covered in the episode on deliberate heat, this is a study out of Finland, showed that you get massive, even 16 fold increases in growth hormone, which are extremely beneficial for metabolism and for recovery. So these massive increases in growth hormone are seen when you are doing these sessions of sauna that are repeated on the same day and you're only doing that about once a week.

Andrew Huberman: Whereas if you do sauna more often, there are certainly benefits to that, but it's time consuming and you need access to sauna more often than one day a week if you're doing it more than one day a week. But if you do it one day a week and you're doing a lot of sessions within that day, as I've detailed here, you see these massive increases in growth hormone that are not observed if you're doing sauna more often for the other benefits of sauna. Now the effects of cold are many, it's not just vasoconstriction, but the effects of cold are also counterbalanced by some of the problems with deliberate cold exposure that maybe you've heard about on this podcast and a lot of other podcasts and seem to be a kind of a buzz theme on Twitter and elsewhere. And the point is this, there are a number of quality studies showing that if you do deliberate cold exposure, in particular ice baths or getting into very cold water immediately after an endurance training session or a strength and hypertrophy session, it can indeed, yes, it can disrupt or prevent some of the adaptations that you are seeking with strength and hypertrophy and endurance workouts.

Andrew Huberman: Okay, so you heard that right. And I believe that to be true based on now several quality peer-reviewed studies. So by doing your deliberate cold exposure on Tuesday, you're not going to get those effects, that is the blocking of hypertrophy or the blocking of strength improvement or the blocking or prevention of improvements in endurance that would occur if you immediately got into the ice bath after a hypertrophy strength or endurance workout. Now the caveat to that is if you are somebody who likes to do cold showers, I am not aware of any data that says that cold showers cannot be performed after a strength hypertrophy or endurance workout. Cold showers are different than submersion up to the neck in an ice bath or another cold body of water for a number of different reasons. In fact, they tap into different aspects of the nervous system entirely.

Andrew Huberman: We don't have time to go into that now, it's covered in the episode on deliberate cold exposure, but the simple point is by doing your heat and cold contrast, or hey, listen, if you're somebody who doesn't have access to sauna or you don't like hot baths and you just do some deliberate cold exposure on Tuesday, you are doing that separate from your strength and hypertrophy and endurance workouts such that it will not impede the benefits of those workouts.
Andrew Huberman: Same thing with the heat, hot enough that you're sweating and that you want to get out, but not so hot that you're running the risk of injuring yourself or killing yourself. And again, that will vary from person to person. So you have to build up slowly, be careful and build up empirically. I do that on Tuesdays again as a way to accelerate recovery and because it's very clear that there are cardiovascular benefits, maybe even benefits for the brain related to the cardiovascular benefits because of course the brain needs a lot of blood flow and needs a lot of nutrients and other things flowing into and out of there, debris out and nutrients and other things into the brain. Heat can help accelerate that or improve that. And so I'm doing that to improve cardiovascular function, improve brain health, and then the cold contrast provides a sort of accelerator on that or an amplifier I think is the better way to phrase it on that process because in the cold you get vasoconstriction and then in the heat you get vasodilation. And so you're maximizing that process, which is actually a neural process.

Andrew Huberman: Nerves actually innervate the blood vessels and capillaries and even the arteries in order to allow that constriction and dilation process to occur. So Tuesday is really about recovery, but my recovery day isn't necessarily about just laying around and not doing anything. I might still also take some walks that day. Remember, I want to try and get that 200 minutes of zone two cardio across the week, and sometimes, not often, but sometimes I'll get in a few minutes or more of walking quickly that day. But generally I'm working a lot on Tuesday as I do on Monday, and I'm a little bit tired and maybe even a little bit sore from my leg workout the previous day Monday. So I try and get that hot cold contrast. There are other benefits to hot and cold contrast. We have a description of the different protocols for hot and for cold and their contrast at our Huberman Lab newsletter. You can find that by going to hubermanlab.com. Go to the newsletter tab under the menu and you can sign up.
Andrew Huberman: Then I get out and then I will get into an ice bath or a cold water bath that's about 45 to 50 degrees Fahrenheit. Again, don't get into water that's so cold that you go into shock. I'll explain what a good cold stimulus could be for you and how to determine that. Or if I don't have access to my sauna and my ice bath, what I can do if I'm traveling is I will take a hot bath and then alternate with cold shower, hot bath, cold shower. It's hard to do hot bath ice bath unless you have two baths. I don't know any hotel rooms, at least I've never stayed in one that has two baths, although I'm sure they're out there. But for me, this is heat cold contrast. And really what this day is about is two things. First of all, I'm trying to accelerate recovery from the leg workout I did previously. Also, if you listen to our episode of the Huberman Lab podcast about deliberate heat exposure or you listen to our episode of the Huberman Lab podcast about deliberate cold exposure, I talk about some of the benefits of heat and cold, and I get into a lot of details about how you can access heat.

Andrew Huberman: You can do baths, you can do saunas, you can even take hot showers. If you don't have access to any of that, you could even wrap your body from the neck down in a garbage bag, plastic garbage bags, believe it or not, wrestlers used to do this, put on some sweats and go running. That'll get you warm. Again, be careful not to overheat and then you can get into a cold shower. So there's a lot of ways, depending on your budget and what you have access to. I don't use cryo, these cryotherapy chambers, they're hard to find. They're expensive. Again, I use sauna and ice bath and I will do anywhere from three to five rounds, which is a lot, anywhere from three to five rounds of heat for about 20 minutes and cold for about 5 minutes. How cold should the cold be? We covered this in the episode on deliberate cold exposure. Here's a general rule of thumb. It should be cold enough that you really want to get out, but not so cold that it's unsafe. And that will vary from person to person. So I cannot give you a simple prescriptive there.
Andrew Huberman: Okay, so with what I would call a standard endurance workout done on Sunday, and I say standard because most people, when they hear endurance, they think of the ability to endure, to continue in a repeated movement or exercise over some period of time, with that workout done on Sunday, and then with the leg workout done on Monday, you can feel really good about how you're heading into the week. However, after training legs on Monday, I experience that doing cardiovascular workouts the next day is either inefficient or at least doesn't really allow me to completely recover from my leg workout. Now, I realize that some people are going to immediately scoff at that, and in fact, there are really beautiful papers out there talking about how one can actually do a fair amount of cardiovascular exercise without interfering with their strength and speed and hypertrophy improvements and vice versa. In fact, there's a terrific review that was mentioned on the podcast with Dr. Andy Galpin.

Andrew Huberman: This is a review that we'll provide a citation to, and a reference and a link to, which is the review by Murach and Bagley, which talks about whether or not there's interference between strength and endurance workouts. Really interesting review if you want to peruse that. But with all that said, I like to take Tuesday as a no endurance, no resistance training day, but that doesn't mean that I'm not doing anything for my overall health and fitness. On Tuesdays, I do a series of heat cold contrast. In other words, I get really, really warm and then I get really, really cold, I get really, really warm and I get really, really cold repeatedly. And the way I do that is by getting into a hot sauna. So for me, that's really hot, but I've built up my heat conditioning, so please don't do this unless you've built up your ability to withstand heat. And I'll get in for about 20 minutes. Sometimes 15, but usually 20 minutes.
Andrew Huberman: But as long as we're on the interactions between androgens testosterone and its derivatives and different tissues from the work that you did as a PhD student and throughout your career, could you say that there are some general principles of training that favor testosterone production? In terms of that somebody who's not an elite athlete could use somebody who's already adapted to weight training somewhat like they know the difference between a dumbbell and a barbell and they know the various movements, they're not going to damage themselves. But once they're doing that I've heard shorter sessions are better than longer sessions, but in rep loads, there's a lot of parameter space. But if you were going to throw out some of the parameters that you think are most important to pay attention to, for the typical person who's trying to use weight training to build or maintain muscle, lose body fat, so body recomposition and or stay strong and healthy for sport of a different kind.

Duncan French: Yes. So the work that we obviously I was exposed to back in my PhD, it was a double edged sword. And as much as testosterone is really stimulated by an intensity factor and also a volume factor, now growth hormone is a little bit different. That's largely driven by an intensity factor alone.

Andrew Huberman: Oh, really? I always thought that growth hormone was driven by volume, which just goes to show you maybe I've got no, I think you're probably right. Which just goes to show you that most of what's out there on the internet is completely not only is it wrong, it's usually backwards. So no, trust I i know. Trust your instinct, because I think people just make this stuff up because it's very hard to measure growth hormone and testosterone. And I can't imagine most of the stuff that I see out there, they're taking drips and measuring free versus bound and all this kind of stuff. But that's what you do in laboratories, right? Yeah.

Duncan French: You look at total composition and you look at how much of that is free circulating in the system, how much is bound and therefore biologically active, bound to receptor creating adaptation. But yeah, coming back to testosterone, in terms of the training strategies, it's largely driven by both an intensity and a volume factor. So if you look at many of the exercise interventions that we use to try and investigate and interrogate testosterone, it was usually a six by ten protocol. So you're touching six by ten, meaning six sets of ten repetitions, which is quite a large 60 repetitions, is quite a large volume for a single exercise. And that was usually pitched at about 80% of a one repetition max intensity.

Andrew Huberman: Okay, so 80% of the one rep max, six sets of ten reps separated by rest of two minutes. Two minutes, which is actually pretty fast, at least to me. Anytime you see these two to three minutes when you're actually watching the clock, those two minute rest periods go by pretty fast.

Duncan French: By the third 4th set, you're dying for more. And I think we formulated that kind of exercise protocol to really target the release of testosterone and try and drive up these anabolic environments to study the endocrine consequences. But I think that's the type of protocol that is most advantageous for driving anabolic environment.

Andrew Huberman: And that was it for the workout.

Duncan French: Yeah, we would do that in a back squat. So multi joint, challenging exercise, multimuscle, multi joint, 80% load of your one repetition max and then six by ten. We did play around with your classic German volume type ten x ten kind of protocols, but they were just unsustainable at that 80%. The key to what we also did was we always adjusted the load to make sure that it was ten repetitions that were sustained. So if the load was too high and an athlete or participant had to drop the weight on the 6th repetition, we would unload the bar and make sure they completed the ten repetitions, bringing me back to the point of it's an intensity and a volume derivative that is going to be most advantageous for testosterone release.

Andrew Huberman: That's really interesting.
Andrew Huberman: I think a key principle that everyone should pay attention to is one that was taught to me by an excellent strength coach years ago, and I still use this and at least it works for me. For each muscle group, try and find an exercise in which you get that muscle into a weighted stretch position. So this would be, for instance, the standing calf raise, down at the bottom, it's weighted and you're in a deep stretch provided you're doing the movement correctly. As well as another exercise where you're getting contraction in the shortened position of the muscle. So for the hamstrings, that would be the leg curl, for the calves, it would be a seated calf raise, for the quadriceps, the leg extension is, if the machine is designed right and you're doing it correctly, the peak contraction is largely going to occur at the legs extended position, but then another exercise for each muscle group that puts the muscle into more of a stretched or at least a larger range of motion or compound type movement, but ideally where there's some stretch there. So I guess I will tell you what exercise I do, for the quadriceps is going to be leg extensions and hack squats.

Andrew Huberman: I use hack squats because I don't do free bar squats for safety reasons, and I like the hack squat machine. I'll do leg curls and glute-ham raises for hamstrings, and I'll do standing calf raises and seated calf raises for the calves. Again, those are the movements that I use because I can perform them safely in the repetition ranges and with the weights that are required for me to either maintain or build leg strength and calf strength. But you might decide that for you, dead lifts are absolutely essential and terrific, or squats free bar squats are absolutely terrific or front squats. I'm not here to tell you which exercises to do or not do. I am telling you that it's probably wise to at least consider doing at least two exercises per muscle group, probably three maximum, if you ask me if you're doing your entire legs and calves in one day. But to think about doing one exercise where the muscle's brought into that shortened peak contraction position, like leg curls or leg extensions or seated calf raise, and then another exercise for each muscle group where there's more of a elongation and maybe even a stretch on the muscle group.
Andrew Huberman: I realize that within the literature, it is believed, and I think generally accepted, that when you stimulate muscle hypertrophy or strength increases, it impacts the nervous system, it also causes things like protein synthesis, et cetera. There are a number of different forms of adaptation that occur to give you muscle strength and size changes. And these days people talk a lot about needing to stimulate muscle growth or muscle strength at least every 48 hours. But I can tell you that I recover route there slowly, and I benefit from working the same muscle group about twice per week, with longer, or I should say more days of rest in between those workouts. So if I train legs on Monday, believe it or not, I'm only training legs on Monday. I do not have a second leg workout during the week. However, on Friday, I do a high intensity interval training session that serves two purposes.

Andrew Huberman: One is it serves the purpose of triggering a certain type of endurance and getting my heart rate very, very high. And in addition to that, because of the way I do that workout, it acts as a sort of supplement or a more moderate intensity workout for quadriceps, hamstrings, and calves, such that I at least never lose strength, and in fact, generally build strength from one leg workout to the next, provided I'm doing things correctly. So what I'm not referring to is the kind of classic super high intensity training once per week and then not actually training that muscle group again. For me, it's really training each muscle group twice per week, once directly and then once indirectly, either during another weight training workout or during a cardiovascular, I should say endurance training workout. So again, legs on Monday, the workout is 50 to 60 minutes, after a brief warmup. I generally pick two exercises per muscle group. So again, I'm doing calves, I'm doing quadriceps, and I'm doing hamstrings.

Andrew Huberman: You should pick the exercises that work for you. So that's why I'm actually not going to share which exercises I use. I'll give you a couple suggestions about the ones I do use, but really, exercise selection, as Dr. Andy Galpin pointed out, is a very important variable. And the key thing to emphasize for that variable is that you need to be able to perform the movement safely. So I know there's a huge debate out there, and people love to argue about whether or not one can squat or deadlift for long periods of time, or should or should not. Some people say you absolutely should. I personally do not squat and do not deadlift. I've actually never done much squatting or deadlifting, and I know some people out there are probably rolling their eyes or switching the channel at this point. But I can say that for me, I've been able to achieve the strength and hypertrophy goals that I've been seeking, doing things like leg extensions and hack squats or for hamstrings, doing things like leg curls and glute-ham raises or for calves doing standing and seated calf raises and so on.
Andrew Huberman: Okay, so now that we're talking about resistance training, the question is going to come up about sets and reps and all of that business. That was covered in a lot of detail on the podcast with Dr. Andy Galpin, and I'm going to get into some of that detail now, but I'm going to wait until I describe the entire set of workouts for the week before I go into even more detail, because there's a way of what's called periodizing that is changing the sets and reps, et cetera, across the week, and indeed from month to month, that's really optimal. But I don't want to make it seem as if all of that just pertains to the leg workout. It actually pertains to all of the resistance training. So I'll just give you a couple of teasers about the key principles of resistance training that I think are almost universally, if not universally, then generally accepted in the strength training and physiology community. And then later I'll get back to some of the overarching principles that apply to all strength and hypertrophy workouts across the week, including the ones for the torso, the arms, et cetera.

Andrew Huberman: Okay, so legs fall on Monday, I should say that leg workouts, like all resistance training workouts, for me, consist of about, again, I'm not neurotically attached to this, but about 10 minutes of warming up and then about 50, five zero, to 60 minutes of real work. Now, of course, some of that is going to be rest between sets, but by real work, I mean really hard work, not necessarily to failure, we'll talk about failure in a little bit, but hard work where I'm struggling to complete the final repetitions, if not going to failure to continue to move the weight repetitions. And again, the entire work portion of that workout is about 50 to 60 minutes. Why? Well, past 60 minutes, you start getting increases in cortisol that really impede recovery. And I personally am somebody that does not recover very well from high intensity exercise.
Andrew Huberman: Now, a really important point to make about this Sunday endurance workout is that allows you to check off a box and that box is 75 or so minutes of zone two cardio, because as you may have heard, either in this podcast or from others out there like Dr. Peter Attia, getting 180 to 200 minutes of zone two cardio per week has enormous positive effects on longevity and enormous positive effects on general health, again, in terms of cardiovascular function, but also metabolic fuel utilization, also in terms of your musculature and your ability to use your body over long distances for long periods of time. So while it doesn't complete all 180 to 200 minutes per week, it certainly gets you a good distance, pun intended, toward that goal.

Andrew Huberman: Now, I want to acknowledge that some people might be starting a fitness program, and so 60 to 75 minutes of jogging might be too long or a three hour weight vested hike, or some people might even do what's called a ruck, like you wear a rucksack, that might be too much, in which case certainly start with less and go on flat ground and go at the rate that allows you to get into zone two, but that is not excessively difficult for you. And then as you build up fitness, you can add time or you can add weight through a weight vest, or if you don't want to buy a weight vest or can't afford one, there's a simple solution to that, I actually have a good anecdote about that. One time I was heading out for a hike with a friend of mine, he was a former SEAL team operator, I'll never forget this, and he said, oh yeah, "I'll bring you a sack." And I thought he meant like a sack lunch, like he was going to bring lunch. And I showed up and he basically gave me a backpack that was loaded with a bunch of stuff and the backpack weighed about 40 pounds. And then we took a hike. So I was thinking lunch, he was thinking weighted backpack, and weighted backpack or even just any kind of strong sack that you can put over your shoulders or even carry in your arms, it's going to work exceedingly well to build in some extra requirement for effort. So you certainly don't have to purchase a weight vest in order to get the benefits of bringing additional weight along with you on these long cardiovascular events. But again, build up over time, you can add time, you can add weight, and that's also a really nice feature of adding weight, which is at some point your schedule might be such, or you just don't really want to keep adding more and more and more time on this long endurance Sunday, in this case, workout, in that case add weight.

Andrew Huberman: You can also, as you build up fitness, you can add speed to it, your zone two and what zone two is won't shift, but what work is required from you in order to get into zone two will shift. That is as you get more and more fit, you'll have to move faster and or bring more weight in order to stay in zone two and that will simply tell you that you are indeed improving your endurance.
Andrew Huberman: For me, this long Sunday jog of 60 to 75 minutes or long Sunday hike or weighted walk or weighted hike really accomplishes that goal. Sometimes leads to a little bit of soreness, particularly in my calves or if I'm wearing the weight vest, sometimes my midsection will get sore because I'm trying to remain upright. So I think it also builds up some muscular endurance, not just cardiovascular endurance, but again, throughout the entire time that I'm jogging or hiking, what I'm trying to get to is a place where I can feel that my pulse rate is definitely elevated, but it's not so elevated that I have to stop because I'm out of breath. And because I know some people out there might be really neurotic about this sort of thing, if you have to stop because you're out of breath, that doesn't mean that you blew the workout, that you now aren't getting endurance. Of course, you're getting benefits from it. So I'm not absolutely neurotic about always staying exactly in that heart rate zone.

Andrew Huberman: I might stop and have a conversation for a moment if it's a longer hike, although I really try and keep moving and I try and push myself just a little bit further than where I'm exceedingly comfortable. And so for me, doing this long Sunday hike or jog really provides a foundation, a base for endurance that then the other endurance workouts that I'll describe later, that take place later in the week, can build on. Now, as I mentioned earlier, we will get back to the mechanisms that this taps into and why this is so useful. There are multiple benefits to doing these kinds of endurance type workouts in zone two cardio. But by putting it at the start of my week, again, my week starts on Sunday, I'm sure that regardless of how the rest of the week goes, that I got my endurance training in, and of course I'm going to want to, and I will do endurance training other days during the week, but if something comes up or I happen to get sick or I'm really behind in terms of work and I can't get other workouts in, this Sunday long jog or hike really provides that fundamental, I can honestly say foundation, for cardiovascular fitness and endurance that I can hang my hat on and say, okay, I've got that one in the bag, and I can then look to other days of the week to focus on other aspects of fitness.
Andrew Huberman: I will say that there's a specific tool or a specific change that you can make to this Sunday long endurance, or at least what I consider long for me, I mean it's by no means a marathon or an Ironman, but this long endurance training, and that's the use of a weight vest. So something that I've really started utilizing more recently, and by more recently, I really mean within the last year or so, is I purchased one of these weight vests that can be anywhere from 10 to 50 pounds. What I use in the weight vest is irrelevant. But it certainly changes the level of effort required when taking a hike or even a walk. Now there's an additional benefit of the weight vest, which is that if you are going out for a hike or even for a walk for social reasons and you're with somebody that's not quite at the same fitness level that you are, frankly it's a little bit rude to just keep walking ahead of them and running back or running ahead and running back.

Andrew Huberman: Oftentimes you really want to spend time with the person and you don't want them to feel as if they're holding you up. And so the weight vest is a terrific way to get some additional work, then, as you'll find if you wear a weight vest, it is additional work on, say, a shorter hike. So maybe the person you're with only has time for an hour long hike, or maybe they just don't have the fitness to do a two hour, three hour hike. So I'll throw on the weight vest and I'll head out for a walk with them or a hike with them, or sometimes I'll go out on a long hike with a weight vest myself. So again, the point of this, for me, Sunday, although it could fall on any day for you, workout, is really to build up that long form endurance. And this fits well with what Dr. Andy Galpin and Dr. Peter Attia referred to as the real need to get in some long endurance type work at some point or even multiple points throughout the week.
Andrew Huberman: Zone two cardio is the kind of cardiovascular exercise in which you're pushing yourself to move such that you're breathing faster than normal, your heart is beating faster than normal, however, you are still able to sustain a conversation. But if you were to push yourself any harder, that is move faster or go up a steeper incline at the same rate you happen to be at any one moment, you would lose that ability to speak, you wouldn't be able to complete sentences, you would be out of breath or you'd have to pause mid-sentence. Now, it's near impossible, even with a heart rate monitor, to stay exactly in zone two unless you're very, very skilled at that. So I don't obsess over that, and in fact I don't wear a heart rate monitor when I do this exercise, but for me, the goal is to head out on Sunday and get 60 to 75 minutes of jogging in zone two. Now of course I like to jog, but that doesn't mean that you have to jog.

Andrew Huberman: You could replace jogging with rowing on a rowing machine or maybe even rowing an actual boat if you have access to that or cycling or swimming, something that allows you continuous movement for 60 to 75 minutes at that zone two threshold we talked about earlier. For me, that can include some hills, and when I say hills, they could be very steep hills, but I simply slow my pace down in order to stay in that roughly zone two range. Or it could be that they are more low grade hills and I might just slow down a little bit or I might even push myself a tiny bit that day. But really I'm just trying to build that long endurance. I'm trying to build up my capacity or maintain my capacity to go a long distance without fatiguing.

Andrew Huberman: Now some days, meaning some Sundays, since I tend to do this almost always on Sunday, although there are exceptions, instead of doing the 60 to 75 minute jog, what I'll do is I will head out for a long hike that could be two and a half hours or three hours or maybe even a four or five hour hike. Sometimes it's very long. And I'll do that sometimes simply to mix up the routine, because sometimes jogging and jogging the same routes gets boring to me. I do enjoy running, that's something I've been doing for a very long time, but sometimes it just gets a little bit tedious and I want to do something different. Also, sometimes I want to be social on Sundays. I want to head out on a hike with my partner or I want to meet up with friends and hike with them. And so taking a long hike on Sunday is something that also could be quite social. And then I don't have to worry about also getting in my workout when I'm heading out on a hike with my partner or going out to meet with friends or things of that sort.
Andrew Huberman: So let's drill into that foundational protocol and I'll keep referring to it as the foundational protocol, not because it's the one that I use, although it is the one that I use, and not because it's the one that we're talking about today, although it's the one we're talking about today, but because we need some general framework from which to build out the more specific protocols that we'll get into in a bit more detail later. So in this foundational protocol for fitness, what you'll notice is that on any one given day, you're going to focus on one particular aspect of fitness. Maybe it's endurance, maybe it's strength, maybe it's hypertrophy, in particular, it might be hypertrophy for a particular muscle group or muscle groups. That said, across the entire week, it's designed to bring fitness and different forms of fitness to all aspects of your body. So this particular protocol begins on Sunday, although that's simply the day that I happen to begin the protocol. And again, this protocol is not important because it's the one that I follow.

Andrew Huberman: I follow it because it is important. In other words, it's a protocol that's really gleaned from the scientific literature and the experts, that is for you. So this fitness protocol is really about you. I just may refer to it as the one that I follow simply for ease of communication. And for me, my week begins on Sunday. So I do my very best to get a workout in on Sunday. And for me, that workout is that of a endurance workout. It's designed to either maintain or increase my endurance, and the endurance type that I'm referring to is endurance of 30 minutes or more. In fact, for me, the goal is always to get either 60 to 75 minutes of jogging. So this would be so-called zone two cardio, people probably have heard of zone two cardio, but if you haven't, that's okay. Zone two cardio is something that you could measure with a heart rate monitor or other device, but you don't need to.
Andy Galpin: You have got to have some sort of overload. The body works as an adaptation mechanism, right? So in fact, we talked previously about the Harvard Fatigue Lab and one of the things actually people don't realize is the concept of homeostasis actually comes from research at the Harvard Fatigue Lab. It was work that they did on an endurance runner, I forget his name. And they sort of realized that after a long period of time working out. This is an acute exercise bout. The body actually comes back to some stable place despite the fact he was continuing to work and that's exactly what bore the phrase steady state. And that actually then they launched off. Andy said, wow, there's this state that the body wants to be in and we'll call this homeostasis. So those all concepts came out of exercise physiology which is really really cool, right? We don't get a lot of love a lot of times scientifically, but that's a good one that we took. So why that all matters is we have got to achieve some sort of overload without going excess. So we'll cover that later of exactly what to do and we'll potentially get into overtraining and monitoring and measuring things like that. But you have to have some sort of consistent, predictable overload.

Andy Galpin: That's what's going to cause adaptation to continue to cause stress. If you don't do that you can still do things like burn calories, you can still get some of the other benefits of exercise like improved mood, cognitive function, et cetera, et cetera. Flexibility increases. All those can happen without a progressive overload. But if you want to see these gains in strength and hypertrophy, you really need to progressively overload. So that's concept number two. The third one here is going to be individualization and this is where we can get into things like personal preference, equipment availability. You have kettlebells or dumbbells, you only have bands or you have none of that. These are all smaller details but that's an important component to it. The last one I really want to get into is picking the appropriate target. And we went through this when we talked about the fitness protocol. Andy, if you run through something like that and you run some testing, andy figure out where your biggest limitations are.
Andy Galpin: I know a lot of I just lost a lot of people, but you can go look at some of these images. The Sarcobosma chicken gets activated more, it gets more sensitive. It is better at releasing calcium, bringing it back in and doing it again. The bond between the cross bridge of the myosin and actin gets stronger. The calcium affinity is the phrase that we use there, increases. So we're literally walking through almost the entire process of skeletal muscle contraction here. And every step along the way we see improvements. So that net result is we see, again, more force production independent of any change in size, independent of any increase in contractile units. We didn't add anything to the equation. We didn't change size. We did nothing but improve efficiency effectively independent of that. Now we can actually start talking about changing muscle fiber type. So we can change our fibers from a slow twitch fiber to a fast twitch fiber.

Andy Galpin: That alone is going to give you more force production, again, independent of size. Fast twitch fibers tend to be larger than slow twitch fibers, but not always, especially in the presence of endurance training. So if you do a lot of consistent endurance training, it's very common for us to find sole chitch fibers that are as similar size, if not larger, often very often larger than the fast touch fibers.

Andrew Huberman: If you do a lot of slow.

Andy Galpin: Fibers, big, slow, very metabolically effective fibers. So extremely fatigue resistant. So it's not a bad thing to call them slow. We tend to say fast and slow. And slow has this negative connotation but it's a quite healthy fiber type to have outside of that. Now, we haven't even gotten into things like penation angle. So this is the angle at which your muscle fibers interact with your bone. So we tend to think about this as like a muscle fiber is pulling on a muscle. Well, some of these are oriented at almost a 90 degree. So a fiber runs perpendicular into the bone and some of them are closer to like a 45 degree and some of them are closer to almost parallel. And that confers a lot of unique mechanical benefits. So in one area it's actually going to increase force production. You go the other direction increases velocity. And so we have all kinds of changes in the angle at which the muscle inserts into the bone. Now we're already in the mechanic side of it, right? So we've how effectively it pulls. And with any of these things, it's always a give and take. So you're going to give up in the case of planation angle, you're going to give up strength, but you're going to increase a lot shortening velocity. Or if you want to increase the velocity, you're going to give up sort of the strength.
Andy Galpin: They are spread out across, horizontally, vertically, as well as closer to the bone and further to the surface. So they're moved throughout the entire way. And this is what allows you to have smoother contractions and you don't have specificity and things like that. So we see improvements from the neuromuscular side, like firing rate. We see synchronization improvements that are coming in. You also see improvements in things like acetylcholine release from the presynaptic neuron. So you're getting it faster. We see calcium recycling is improved back to there. So in order for without walking into too much of the biochemistry, in order for a signal to go from nerve to muscle, there's a little bit of a gap. There's a physical space that happens. Andy, what happens is you release this molecule called acetylcholine. This goes into the post synaptic cleft and then that actually binds to a receptor. That receptor actually opens up a door that lets sodium in. That's really what's happening. So it's not the cocholine.

Andy Galpin: Well, that acetylcholine then sits on that receptor site. It's broken down, put back in and recycled back up in the presynaptic nerve site. The faster you can do that, the faster you can recycle that signal. And so almost everything that I describe in that entire system improves and has been shown to increase with tranny. So that alone is given to give you benefits. We haven't even walked into getting from an electrical signal now into an action potential which is going to cause a muscle contraction. So getting from nerve into the muscle, we see everything from improvements in what we call contractility, which means the muscle fiber themselves can produce more force or more velocity independent of muscle size changes. This is another component when we ask like, well, how is that I got stronger without getting bigger? Well, in the muscle fiber itself, its ability to contract force increases. And this because we have everything like the Sarcoplasmic reticulum, which is the place that stores and releases the calcium, which is what's needed for this entire cross bridge interaction from the myos. Andy an actin to happen.
Andrew Huberman: So for both men and women, boys, andy, girls, what are the major adaptations that occur to underlie improvements in strength? And if you would, if you could just provide a bullet point list of that and then we can dive into each of those in detail. For instance, are nerves getting more efficient at firing our bones? Enjoying adaptations in different bone connective tissue relationships that underlie strength? I have to imagine all of these things are happening, but what are the major changes that are occurring in those organs and organ systems that reflect someone's ability to on one day lift 100 and then a week later to lift 105?

Andy Galpin: Now I'll try to keep this condensed again. This could be an entire university course. I will also try to give you a little bit of bones here. So normally as a muscle guy, I take all the credit and muscle. Turns out the nervous system gets a little bit of credit too. Here.

Andrew Huberman: Thank you.

Andy Galpin: So as we walk through it, just as a big picture, if we think about, again, what causes human movement, basically everything along that chain will improve the strength training. And I'm not really being using too much hyperbole there. It's quite impressive. So it's going from the nervous system side of the equation. What has to happen for human movement is a nerve has to send a signal through a motor unit. Now a motor unit comes down and innovates multiple muscle fibers. So if you think about your actual muscle, it's not a thing. It is a component of many individual muscle fibers. You've got millions, if not more. Think of it like a ponytail. So we collectively say ponytail. And you think of it as like one thing, but really a ponytail is a combination of tons of individual hairs. Muscle is the same way. So this motor unit comes in and innervates a lot of different muscle fibers. Now, every one of the fibers in a motor unit is generally of the same fiber type. So fast twitch or slow twitch andy, they are not laid out next to each other in the muscle.
Andy Galpin: Positive changes, correct. And if you worked with there are many physicians that specialize in this area, you're going to need a nutrition here. Strength training alone is probably not going to get you there, particularly with women, because you have to figure out why. And there's a lot going on with the physiology and biochemistry. So you probably almost surely need to have some blood chemistry done with that. You have to figure out what's going on menstrual cycle wise. In fact, oftentimes what we'll do for our women very specifically is we use a thing called the rhythm plus a 30 day test. So you can actually do a salivary test across the entire menstrual cycle and you can take samples it's about every other day. So you'll get 15 or 16 samples and you get a really beautiful picture of what's happening hormonally across the entire menstrual cycle. And that's really, really important because typically for women, if you get a single sample or simple time point, whether it's salivary, urine or blood, you can have an order of magnitude difference in any number of metrics because of what phaser. And this is one of the many reasons why it's been such a challenge to do a lot of physiology research with females. Some metrics change throughout the menstrual cycle, others don't.

Andy Galpin: Like strength is a very good example. I can strength tan and I can do a one rep max test on a woman at any point. I don't have to do that at a certain phase of their menstrual cycle because the evidence, I think, is pretty clear at this point that number won't change. So I have no qualms, including females in any of my studies where strength is an absolute, is an important dependent variable because I don't have to adjust around menstrual cycle. Other factors, like anything in blood, anything hormone related, you're going to have to automatically account for it. So what I would say is those folks should absolutely work with a qualified physician. And you're going to have to get some nutrition supplementation potentially, and then maybe even some other stuff going on to make that even more complicated. If you're on any form of birth control or not, that's going to change the entire equation, especially if it's a hormone based birth control. So it just gets really, really complicated.

Andy Galpin: To answer it, though, you can see adaptations, they are significantly diminished relative to if you would have started in your teens and 20s. But there is hope. You just need to work with somebody who specializes in that area.
Andrew Huberman: And I do want to ask about bone, and here I'm not referring to bone mineral density. What I was going to ask is whether or not bone itself can grow and get stronger. And the reason I'm asking is there's a favorite result of mine? I have about 3800 favorite results, 3000 pet peeves and 3800 plus favorite results. But one of my favorite results is from Eric Kendall's lab at Columbia. Eric won the Nobel Prize for learning and memory, and his laboratory got really into the effects of exercise on learning and memory. And they had this incredible result, which is that load bearing exercise stimulates the bones to release something called osteocalcin. Excuse me. And then osteocalcin acts as more or less a hormone, travels to the brain and enhances the memory systems in the brain by enhancing neuron health. That's the basic crux of the studies.

Andrew Huberman: There were several of these and the moment I saw the first of those studies, I thought, well, here's another reason to do resistance type exercise and not just aerobic exercise. And then it brings to mind whether or not bones themselves get stronger when we do resistance training. I don't know the answer to that.

Andy Galpin: Yeah, that's very clearly demonstrated and we've known that for many decades. You have a diminishing ability to do so with age particularly. You need to do this in your teens and 20s. This is where you're going to have the largest ability to enhance bone mineral density. And it's particularly responsive to axial loading. Now, I'm a muscle guy, I'm not a bone specialist. So we would have to consult somebody who can give you more position here. But that you explain axial loading it's up and down. It's vertical.

Andrew Huberman: Okay. So it's almost like a cylinder putting weight on the small end of the cylinder on both small end of the cylinders.

Andy Galpin: Yeah.

Andrew Huberman: If someone doesn't do this in their 20s or teens, however, can we assume that some degree of positive change will occur if they do resistance training, even if it's a small fraction?

Andy Galpin: The answer is yes, it is small. We have worked with a number of women in our rapid health program that come in and they are in their twenty s and they're in their thirty s and they have significant bone mineral density problems. And eight months later we can see noticeable changes that are outside of the measurement error of a Dexa.

Andrew Huberman: Positive changes.
Andy Galpin: This is probably one of the major reasons that strength training reduces injury risk, which is very, very important because people who tend to want to pick up an exercise routine after, say, ten years, the classic cliche is like, I played all these things in high school, then I went to college, got a job. Now I'm 25 or 35 or whatever. Andy, you sort of want to jump back into what you did when you were 20. Well, there's no tissue tolerance left. And what we almost always mean by that is connective tissue. The tolerance in there is not ready for the load you're about to handle. And so you go through some movement, and then boom, sprains tears, even like the more significant ones are on Achilles tear, which is going to really sideline you. So those are some of the problems. And we know strength training has a large role in injury reduction, for stress and strain and overuse injuries. And that's specifically coming for the connective tissue adaptations. Again, the difficult part here is it's very hard to assess.

Andy Galpin: When I was a doctoral student, we played around with patel attendant biopsies, so I actually had one.

Andrew Huberman: There's a little piece of your patel attendant missing. Yeah. Because your own lab.

Andy Galpin: So now I've probably had I don't know how many hundreds of biopsies I've performed on people. Probably well over a thousand. Certainly well over a thousand. I've probably had 35 or 40 done of myself. There's no problem here. I have no scar tissue. I have no loss of function. And I've stuck needles in every leg, like, all over myself. Right. Quads. Mysolius gastroc all up.

Andrew Huberman: Taking tissue out.

Andy Galpin: Yeah, you want the needle? Looks like a pen, basically. And you're alive, and you go in and grab a chunk and you pull it out.

Andrew Huberman: Can I come to your lab and get biopsy? Absolutely, yeah. You're probably looking under the microscope. It'll just look like the molecule.

Andy Galpin: Caffeine there's a mutual friend of ours who came down to the debt. He's a big, big gentleman, big into lifting, very into strength training. And he went through that experience, and he was like, oh, my gosh. It was not what he was hoping to get. He. Actually had unbelievable muscle morphology. His fibers were the diameter of muscle fibers is extremely large. It's one of the biggest cells by volume in all of biology, skeletal muscle in human andy, how large?

Andrew Huberman: Can't help myself.

Andy Galpin: Millimeters well, so you have length and then you have width. Right. So length wise, they can be extraordinarily long. The classic example is like your sartorius, which is like the front of your hip to the inside of your kneecap. Theoretically, those cells can run the entire length, which would be one muscle fiber running that thing. If I were to do a biopsy on you and I pulled that tissue out, I could actually pull an individual fiber out with Tweezers and hold it up and you could see that whole muscle cell.

Andrew Huberman: Yeah, I'm definitely not going to get biopsied.

Andy Galpin: You'd be stunned how big they are. Anyways, his was the size of a rhino. So the diameter of his now he has a well documented assistance in the area of muscle growth, we'll say. But yeah, those can be large. So what were we even talking about there?

Andrew Huberman: Well, I was asking about tendons and ligaments because I'd like to understand the various tissues and organ systems that adapt when one gets stronger, when muscle tissue grows.
Andrew Huberman: When strength improves and when hypertrophy increases, is there also involvement in the ligaments, andy tendons, that is, of course the ligaments and tendons are involved in the movements. But do ligaments and tendons themselves grow and or get stronger?

Andy Galpin: This field is really difficult because connective tissue is not vascular. And so their plasticity is significantly lower than skeletal muscle. In fact, if you look across all the organs, skeletal muscle is one of, if not the most plastic, meaning it's the most pliable, the most responsive, the one that's going to adjust. It's paying attention to everything that's being said in the body. You cannot change blood pressure or PH or macronutrients floating around without muscle knowing about it. In fact, this is why we call muscle an organ. People don't tend to think about this. If you were ever on Jeopardy. And they ask you that question of like, what's the biggest organ system in the body? People tend to say the skin muscle is actually the correct answer.

Andrew Huberman: All right, well, I'm going to cite you when I get it. You'll probably get it wrong in Jeopardy. I don't have any immediate plans to go on Jeopardy. But who knows.

Andy Galpin: Oh, there you go. Celebrity Jeopardy.

Andrew Huberman: Henry Huberman wait, I don't know about the celebrity part, but Jeopardy. Would be fun. But I will say the muscle. And if you get a phone call on Jeopardy. I don't know, I haven't seen that show in a very long time, maybe ever. Then I'll call you. But that makes sense. Muscles would be the largest organ system in the body.

Andy Galpin: The reason I was saying that is so muscle is both listening and talking. It is controlling the immune system a lot. It's controlling blood glucose regulation. It is the central depot for amino acids, which are needed to do things like regulate the immune system, build any new red blood cells. A lot of this stuff is coming from skeletal muscles. So when we say organ, by the way, that's actually like a physiological definition. So something that's communicating to either another organ itself or throughout the system. So it's listening and it's talking. Connective tissue is not the same way. And so we do see adaptations. With strength training in connective tissue, it's just much lower. It's difficult to measure effectively. What we know now is you're going to have a combination of adaptations throughout the connective tissue. It is beneficial.
Andy Galpin: However, there's a point where you simply have to add more mass to get a higher number. And that's why we have weight classes in those sports and in combat sports and lots of other things. So there's a lot of confusion, right? Because people think, man, either these are the same thing, or if I want to get stronger, I have to get bigger, which is not the case at all. Another misnomer here is I can't get stronger unless I add muscle. That's not true either, right? It's a similar idea. So what I'm saying is you have the ability to do whatever you'd like if you'd like to get stronger. Andy add muscle, great. If you add muscle, you're probably going to bring some strength along for the ride. However, if you want to get stronger and you don't want to add muscle for any reason, personal preference on aesthetics, whether you're in a weight class and you simply can't afford it, it is quite easy to get stronger and not add much muscle mass either. Andy so differentiating these two things is one of them is simply a measure of size, and the other one is a measure of force. And when we talk about strength, what we're really talking about are two unique components.

Andy Galpin: Component one is what I call the physiology. So what is the ability of the neuromuscular system? What is the ability of the muscle fibers to contract and produce force? The other one is what we call mechanics. And mechanics is simply things like it's minutiae down to how long your femurs are relative to your tibia or other things like this is biomechanics, this is also technique. This is skill. This is how smooth do you feel? This is are you firing the right muscle group in the right sequence and order? And all of these things play into strength. So somebody who maybe has more force capability in their muscle fibers, but their technique andy the movement is worse, may lose in a competition or somebody again who's like if you go into the world of speed and power, especially, you'll hear a lot of people talk about like the rhythm. And there's just a certain rhythm that has to happen if you want to jump as high as possible or run as fast as possible. But that's all mechanics at this fundamental level. So when we look at hypertrophy, it's just still simply about how big the muscle is. So those are the really the similarities and distinctions between strength and hypertrophy.
Andrew Huberman: Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is also separate from Dr. Galpin's teaching and research roles at Cal State Fullerton. It is, however, part of our desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, we'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Momentous. Momentous makes supplements of the absolute highest quality. The Huberman Lab Podcast is proud to be partnering with Momentous for several important reasons. First of all, as I mentioned, their supplements are of extremely high quality. Second of all, their supplements are generally in single ingredient formulations. If you're going to develop a supplementation protocol, you're going to want to focus mainly on using single ingredient formulations.

Andrew Huberman: With single ingredient formulations, you can devise the most logical and effective and cost effective supplementation regimen for your goals. In addition, Momentous supplements ship internationally. And this is of course important because we realize that many of the Huberman Lab Podcast listeners reside outside the United States. If you'd like to try the various supplements mentioned on the Huberman Lab Podcast, in particular, supplements for hormone health, for sleep optimization, for focus, as well as a number of other things including exercise recovery, you can go to Livemomentous spelled Ous. So that's Livemomentous.com Huberman today's episode is also brought to us by Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers with cooling, creatine and sleep tracking capacity. I've been using an eight sleep mattress cover for about the last eight months, and it has completely transformed my sleep.

Andrew Huberman: I'm sleeping about the same amount, but I'm sleeping far deeper, and I'm now getting the proper ratios of so called rapid eye movement, or REM sleep and slow wave sleep, and waking up feeling far more recovered mentally and physically. The underlying mechanism for all that is very straightforward. I've talked many times before on this podcast and elsewhere about the critical relationship between sleep and body temperature. That is, in order to fall asleep at night, your body needs to drop by about one to three degrees in terms of core body temperature, and waking up involves a one to three degree increase in core body temperature.

Andrew Huberman: With eight sleep mattress covers, you can adjust the temperature of your sleeping environment to be one temperature at the start of the night, a different temperature in the middle of the night andy a different temperature as you approach morning, each of which can place you into the optimal stages of sleep and have you waking up feeling more refreshed than ever. If you'd like to try Aidsleep, you can go to eight Sleep Huberman and check out their Pod Three cover and save $150 at checkout. Aidsleep currently ships in the USA, Canada, United Kingdom, select countries in the EU and Australia. Again, that's eight Sleep Huberman to save $150 at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Levels. Levels is a program that lets you see how different foods and activities affect your health by giving you real time feedback on your blood glucose using a continuous glucose monitor.

Andrew Huberman: Many people are aware that their blood sugar, that is, their blood glucose level is critical for everything from fat loss to muscle gain to healthy cognition and indeed, aging of the brain and body. Most people do not know, however, how different foods and different activities, including exercise or different temperatured environments, impact their blood glucose levels. And yet blood glucose is exquisitely sensitive to all of those things. I first started using Levels about a year ago as a way to understand how different foods exercise andy timing of food relative to exercise and quality of sleep at night impact my blood glucose levels. And I've learned a tremendous amount from using Levels. It's taught me when best to eat, what best to eat, when best to exercise, how best to exercise, and how to modulate my entire schedule from work to exercise and even my sleep. So if you're interested in learning more about Levels and trying a continuous glucose monitor yourself, go to Levels link huberman.

Andrew Huberman: That's levels huberman.
Andy Galpin: We haven't gotten to any of the energetics at all. So we haven't talked about increasing storage of phosphorcreateine, which is the energy system needed to power that muscle contraction at the fastest possible rate. So we could continue to go as long as you want here, but hopefully you're getting the point of a little bit of the adaptations that occur. The reason I want to actually why I think that stuff is important, to bring it back, maybe for some musters. I know I took you on a journey there and you're just like, what the hell just happened that matters? Because again, this is the specific explanation for how is it possible that I got stronger but I didn't get bigger. And this is also why strength and hypertrophy are intertwined. Andy are heavily overlapped but are not necessarily the same thing. So for example, we can increase muscle size and actually reduce strength because of what's called lattice spacing. So what happens is you have to kind of remember your muscle fibers are these long cylinders and the way that they contract requires an optimal space. And so what happens is you have this molecule called Actin and you have this molecule called myosin.

Andy Galpin: Myosin sits in the middle and there are six actin that surround each individual. Myosin in a three dimensional circle here. So you got a myosin in the middle that house all these globular heads and they can reach up and grab an actin. And again, there are six sort of around them. Right. Well, one of the things that can occur is if those actin are too close together. So imagine my hands, I'm reaching out and doing a giant t, right? So I'm horizontal out there. Well, if my fingertips are the tips of the myosin andy I'm trying to reach up and grab an actin, and I want to pull those actins closer to my face. Well, those actins stack on top of each other, and that's what actually makes your muscles grow up. Like, if I flex my bicep, it actually grows up three or four inches because you're stacking these sarcomirs, or what they're called, on top of each other. All right, great. Well, if I'm reaching out to grab them andy the muscle is stretched too far. I can't actually make that strong of a connection.

Andy Galpin: It would be like if I reached out and grabbed something, but I can only reach my longest fingertip on it. When I go to contract, I can't make that strong of a contraction because my grip is weak. My grip is going to break before I reach my strength limit. If I'm too close, there's nowhere to go. I'm already as close. So if you actually disrupt that lattice spacing too much, you can actually lose a little bit of strength. So it's not that getting bigger will ever make you weaker. It's simply that you're not optimizing for strength, you're simply optimizing for size. Andy so that can explain a little bit of the discontinuity between growing andy performance.
Andrew Huberman: But if you look at the literature on exercise related neurogenesis in mice or brain atrophy or brain hypertrophy, et cetera, in animal models, it's very clear that the best way to get a nervous system to atrophy, to lose. Neurons, shrink neurons or lose connections between neurons is to stop that animal from moving or to de enrich its environment, deprive it of some sensory input or multiple sensory inputs. And the best way to enhance the size of neurons, the number of connections between neurons, and maybe even the number of neurons, is to enrich its environment and get it moving while enriching that environment.

Peter Attia: You know, Andrew, I think it's very difficult for me to say the same is not true in humans. And so the first time this became clear to me was in 2014. I had an analyst, Dan Pellachar, and I said, Dan, I'm going to give you a project that is vexing me to no end, which is I want you to look at all of the literature that we have, both mechanistic and clinical trial data that talks about Alzheimer's prevention. And I want to know every single type of input, and I want to have a clear sense of via. What mechanism does it offer? What mode of protection, and it took Dan, and this was obviously we iterated a lot on this together. And he came back with kind of an amazing presentation that took nine months to a year of work. And what amazed me was when he came back to it, he said, the single greatest efficacy we can point to is exercise. And I was like, Dan, that's got to be nonsense, dude. There's no way exercise is the single best thing you can do for the brain. There has to be some drug you've missed.

Peter Attia: There has to be some other thing that you've missed. And he's like, no, this is hands down the best thing, because it's not just what it's doing to bdnf. It's not just what it's doing to vascular endothelium. It's not just what it's doing to glucose disposal and insulin signaling, all these things. It's just touching every aspect of the brain. And I was very skeptical for about six months, kind of really pushed on him, and I was like, I think you're missing something, Dan. I think you're missing something. And then finally, in the end, looped in Richard Isaacson, who's a neurologist that we work with really closely on Alzheimer's prevention. And ultimately, it turned into a paper that we wrote basically about this topic and a few others, because, again, I thought, are you sure it's not EPA and DHA? That's got to have a bigger impact. And again, there's a lot of things that I think do matter, and there's a whole host of things that we do for Alzheimer's prevention. But I think you're absolutely right.
Andrew Huberman: Great. And then because for some people, thinking in terms of EO two max is a little more complicated. They might not have access to the equipment or to measure it, et cetera. What can we talk about thinking about in terms of cardiovascular? So run a mile at seven minutes or less? Eight minutes or less?

Peter Attia: That's a good question. So there are really good Vo two max estimators online, and you can plug in your activity de jour, be it a bike run or rowing machine, and it can give you a sense of that. And I used to know all of those, but now that I just actually do the testing, I don't recall them. But it's exactly that line of thinking, like, can you run a mile in this time? If you can, your Vo two max is approximately this great. And I think somewhere in my podcast realm, I've got all those charts posted of, like, this is by age, by sex. This is what the vo. Two max is in each of those buckets.

Andrew Huberman: Terrific. We'll provide links to those. We'll have our people find those links. And then you mentioned deadlifting body weight ten times.

Peter Attia: I just made that one up. That's not one that we include, but something like that. We use farmer carries. So we'll say for a male, you should be able to farmer carry your body weight for I think we have two minutes. So that's half your body weight in each hand. You should be able to walk with that for two minutes. For women, I think we're doing 75% of body weight or something like that, yeah.

Andrew Huberman: Great. I love it as indirect measures of how healthy and huge we are and how long we're going to live.

Peter Attia: It's basically grip strength, it's mobility. I mean, again, walking with that much weight, for some people initially is really hard. We use different things like vertical jump, ground contact time, if you're jumping off a box, things like that. So it's really trying to capture and it's an evolution. Right. Like, I think the test is going to get only more and more involved as we get involved because it took us about a year. Beth Lewis did the majority of the work to develop this. Beth runs our strength and stability program in the practice, and basically, I just tasked her with, like, hey, go out to the literature and come up with all of the best movements that we think are proxies. For what? You need to be like the most kick ass, what we call centenarian decathlete, which is the person living in their marginal decade at the best.

Andrew Huberman: Well, what I'm about to say is certainly a mechanistic leap.
Andrew Huberman: So maybe we could talk a little bit about the specifics around the training to get into that top two tiers there, because it seems that those are enormous positive effects of cardiovascular exercise, far greater than the sorts of numbers that I see around. Let's just say supplement a or supplementation.

Peter Attia: This is my whole pet peeve in life, right? It's like I just can't get enough of the machinating and arguing about this supplement versus that supplement. And I feel like you shouldn't be having those arguments until you have your exercise house in order. You shouldn't be arguing about this nuance of your carnivore diet, versus this nuance of your paleo diet, versus this nuance of your vegan diet until you can deadlift your body weight for ten reps, then you can come and talk about those things or something. Like, let's just come up with some metrics until your V o two max is at least to the 75th percentile and you're able to dead hang for at least a minute, and you're able to wall sit for at least two. Like, we could rattle off a bunch of relatively low hanging fruit. I wish there was a rule that said, like, you couldn't talk about anything else health related.

Andrew Huberman: We can make that rule.

Peter Attia: No one will listen to it.

Andrew Huberman: I don't know about that. We can make whatever rules we want, we can call a Tia's Rule. One thing I've done before in this podcast and on social media is just borrowing from the tradition in science, which is it's inappropriate to name something after yourself unless you were a scientist before 1950. But it's totally appropriate to name things after other people. So I'm going to call it a Tia's rule until you can do the following things don't talk about, please refrain.

Peter Attia: From talking about supplements and nutrition.

Andrew Huberman: There it is. Hereafter thought of, referred to, and referenced as atia's rule. I coined the phrase, not him. So there's no ego involved, but it is now atia's rule. Watch out. Hashtag atia's Rule. Oh, God. Wikipedia entry atia's Rule. In all seriousness, and I am serious about that, deadhang for about a minute seems like a really good goal for a lot of people.

Peter Attia: At least that's our goal. I think we have a minute and a half is the goal for a 40 year old woman. Two minutes is the goal for 40 year old man. So we adjust them up and down based on age and gender. Great.

Andrew Huberman: And then the wall sit what's what.

Peter Attia: Are some we don't use a wall sit. We do as just a straight squat, air squat at 90 degrees. And I believe two minutes is the standard for both men and women at 40.
Peter Attia: It's all defined by given studies. So the most common things that are used are actually they're used for the purposes of experiments that make it easy to do. And I don't even think they're the best metrics, so they're usually using like grip strength, leg extensions and wall sits, squats, things like that. So how long can you sit in a squatted position at 90 degrees without support would be a great demonstration of quad strength. A leg extension, how much weight can you hold for how long relative to body weight, things like that. We have a whole strength program that we do with our patients. We have something called the SMA. So it's a strength metrics assessment and we put them through eleven tests that are really difficult, like a dead hang is one of them. Like, how long can you dead hang your body weight? Stuff like that. So we're trying to be more granular in that insight, but tie it back to these principles. If you look at cardio respiratory fitness, it's even more profound. So if you look at people who are in the bottom 25% for their age and sex in terms of vo two max and you compare them to the people that are just at the percentile, you're talking about a two x difference, roughly in the risk of ACM.

Peter Attia: If you compare the bottom 25% to the top 2.5%, so you're talking about bottom quarter to the elite for a given age, you're talking about five x. Wow. 400% difference in all cause mortality. That's probably the single strongest association I've seen for any modifiable behavior.

Andrew Huberman: Incredible. So when you say elite, these are people that are running marathons at a pretty rapid clip.

Peter Attia: Not necessarily. It's just like what the vo two max is for. That like my vo two max would be in the elite for my age group, my vo two max. But again, I'm training very deliberately to make sure that it's in that. So I wouldn't consider myself elite at anything anymore, but I still maintain a vo two max that is elite for my age.

Andrew Huberman: I consider you an elite physician and podcast and guy all around, but true.

Peter Attia: But the point is, you don't have to be a world class athlete to be a lead tier.

Andrew Huberman: Yeah, got it.
Andrew Huberman: What does that translate to? And that means I'm shortening my life by 40%?

Peter Attia: No, it means at any point in time, there's a 40% greater risk that you're going to die relative to a non smoker and an peter smoker. So it's important to distinguish. It doesn't mean your lifespan is going to be 40% less. It means at any point in time, standing there, your risk of death is 40% higher. And by the way, that'll catch up with you, right? At some point that catches up high blood pressure, it's about a 20% to 25% increase in all cause mortality. You take something really extreme, like end stage kidney disease. So these are patients that are on dialysis waiting for an organ. And again, there's a confounder there, because what's the underlying condition that leads you to that? It's profound hypertension significant type two diabetes that's been uncontrolled. That's enormous. That's about 175% increase in ACM. So the hazard ratio is like 2.75. Type two diabetes is probably about a 1.25 as well. So 25% increase. So now the question is, like, how do you improve? So what are the things that improve those? So now here we do this by comparing low to high achievers and other metrics. So if you look at low muscle mass versus high muscle mass, what is the improvement? And it's pretty significant.

Peter Attia: It's about three x. So if you compare low muscle mass people to high muscle mass people as they age, the low muscle mass people have about a three x hazard ratio, or 200% increase in all cause mortality. Now, if you look at the data more carefully, you realize that it's probably less the muscle mass fully doing that, and it's more the high association with strength. And when you start to tease out strength, you can realize that strength could be probably three and a half x as a hazard ratio, meaning about 250% greater risk if you have low strength to high strength.

Andrew Huberman: High strength is the ability to move loads at 80% to 90% of one.
Andrew Huberman: I've heard you talk before about some of the prime movers for longevity and all risk mortality, and I'd love for you to review a little bit of that for us. I think we all know that we shouldn't smoke because it's very likely that we'll die earlier if we smoke nicotine. I'm neither a marijuana nor a nicotine smoker, so I feel unstable ground there. But anytime we see smoking nowadays, people really want to distinguish between cannabis and nicotine. So I am curious about any differences there in terms of impact on longevity, but in that context, what are the things that anyone and everyone can do, should do to live longer, basically?

Peter Attia: How long you got?

Andrew Huberman: Well, you tell me. You tell me. I'd like my final decade to be between 91 hundred oh, no, I meant.

Peter Attia: How long and will we spend from now until you're 90 talking about well.

Andrew Huberman: There'S a risk of that, but top contour is fine. I know you've done a lot of content on this, and we will give people links to some of that more in depth content. But let's say we were on a short flight from here to San Diego. We're in Los Angeles now, and we've got takeoff and landing, and we don't want to kink our neck too much by doing this thing. So if I just said, hey, give me the extended version of the three by five card, what does that look like?

Peter Attia: So let's start with a couple of the things that you've already highlighted. So, smoking, how much does smoking increase your risk of all cause mortality? And and the reason we like to talk about what's called ACM or all cause mortality is it's really agnostic to how you die. And that doesn't always make sense. I mean, if you're talking about a very specific intervention, like an attia cancer therapeutic, you really care about cancer specific mortality or heart specific mortality. But when we talk about these sort of broad things, we like to talk about ACM. So using smoking, smoking is approximately a 40% increase in the risk of ACM.
Andrew Huberman: Before we continue with today's discussion, I'd like to just briefly acknowledge our sponsor, Athletic Greens, now called AG One. Athletic Greens, aka AG One, is an all in one vitamin mineral probiotic drink that also has adaptogens and digestive enzymes. I've been taking Athletic Greens since way back in 2012, so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic greens and the reason I still drink Athletic. Greens twice a day, is that it. Supplies total foundational coverage of my vitamin mineral needs, and it supplies important nutrients that I need to support my gut microbiome. The gut microbiome, as many of you know, supports the immune system. It also supports the so called gut brain axis, which is vital for mood, for energy levels, for regulating focus, and many other features of our mental health and physical health that impact our daily performance and high performance in any endeavors we might be involved in.

Andrew Huberman: If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to Athleticgreens.com huberman and claim a special offer. They're giving away five free travel packs plus a year supply of vitamin D three K Two with every order, and of course, vitamin D three K Two are vital for all sorts of things, like hormone health and metabolic health, and K Two for cardiovascular health and calcium regulation. Again, you can go to Athleticgreens.com Huberman to claim that special offer.
Peter Attia: I've yet to see one company that can do this in a way that isn't abjectly horrible. We've created our own templates, so we have our own dashboard for how we do this, because we've just given up on trying to use theirs. But the first thing most people look at is, what's my body fat? And this is the gold standard outside of, like, MRI or something that's only used for research purposes. So a Dexa is going to produce a far better estimate of body fat than calipers or buoyancy testing or things like that, provided the machinery is well, calibrated and the operator knows how to use it. I've heard some people argue that in the hands of the guy who's been doing calipers his whole life, it could probably be comparable with calipers. But nevertheless, for an off the shelf tech, dexa is amazing. Of the four things that get spit out of the Dexa, we think that the body fat is the least interesting. And so I would rank that as fourth on the list of what's germane to your health.

Peter Attia: The other three things that you get spit out are bone mineral density, visceral fat, and then the metrics that allow you to compute, to basically compute what's called appendicular, lean mass index and fat free mass index. And so those three metrics are significantly more important than body fat. And the reason is as follows, right? So bone mineral density basically speaks to your risk of osteoporosis and osteopenia. And that doesn't sound very sexy to people our age. 50 year old guys listening to this. It's like, yeah, big deal. But for a 50 year old woman, this is a huge deal, right? A woman who's just about to go through menopause or has just gone through menopause is at an enormous risk for osteopenia, and then ultimately osteoporosis, because estrogen is the single most important hormone in regulating bone mineral density. And we can come back and talk about why that's the case. But it's very interesting how the biomechanics of bones work and why estrogen specifically is so important. And this is a huge cause of morbidity, right? So if you're over the age of 65 and you fall and break your hip, your one year morbidity is about 30% to 40%, which, again, just to put that in English, if you're 65 or older, you fall and break your hip, there's a 30% to 40% chance you're dead in a year.

Andrew Huberman: Wow.

Peter Attia: Bones matter. So we want to really get a sense of where you stack up for your age, for your sex. And if you're anywhere off the pace, we have to ramp up our strategy and be super aggressive about how to increase that or at a minimum, prevent any further decay.

Andrew Huberman: And are there age related charts for these sorts of things?

Peter Attia: Yeah, this all gets spit out into what's called a Z score. So when you're looking at your Bmd, it's going to give you a Z score. So a Zscore of zero means and you understand this, but it's Z score referring to a probability distribution in a standard mode. So Z score of zero means you're at the 50th percentile for your age and sex. A Z score of plus one, your one standard deviation above, minus one below, et cetera. There's also a T score, which is doing the same thing, but comparing you to a young person. And so the T score is technically used to make the diagnosis of osteopenia. Osteoporosis. We tend to look more at the Zscore and basically say, look, if your Z score right now is minus one in four years, I want your Z score to be zero. Not necessarily because you've increased that entire way, but maybe you've increased slightly while it's expected that you would have declined.

Andrew Huberman: I see.
Andy Galpin: That's not speed work. You just did a different type of endurance. Training, which is great and important. So true speed work is very high rest, very low fatigue, and actually truly trying to reach a new level of speed or velocity. So non fatiguing, if you did that exclusively for ten weeks, you would be pretty unfit by the end of it because you would also lose a decent amount of muscle mass, not because there's an interference effect, but simply because of the fact you have not stimulated muscle growth for eight to ten weeks. And so neither one of these is better than the other. We're going to see this classically across all program design or periodization strategies. It's a give and take. There are tons of different systems and perhaps at the end we can talk about some of the more advanced periodization styles. These ones are both effective.

Andy Galpin: You could do these with beginners, you could do these with advanced athletes, you could do them any of the spectrum, but they're some of the more well documented ones. It's just a pro and con game, right? It's what are you willing to give up? The way that you solve that problem is going back to that fitness assessment and your analysis and really truly understanding what your goal is. Is your goal to do a little bit of strength and a little bit okay, great. Maybe undulated periodization is an approach if your goal is really to maximize strength and maybe you can wait on putting some muscle mass on, maybe linear periodization is a better approach or another style of periodization that's optimal for strength gain. So it's just simply about addressing your things. One of the major problems folks have in addition to lacking progressive overload is they don't have any foresight past the next day of the training. Andy so it's really important that you set off blocks that are anywhere between six to twelve weeks long where you're going to have the specific plan.

Andy Galpin: Ideally you have an idea for the whole year. I actually have like a structure, I can walk you through for that. But even if you don't have that, really think about what you want the next twelve weeks and then maybe the next twelve weeks after that. And that's going to give you a lot of guidance about what to do and what to focus on.
Andy Galpin: Systolic versus diastolic, that's a normal number, right. High blood pressure is something over that. Well, with an acute bout of exercise, you can see that number reach as high as, like, 450 over 350, which effectively means you have total blood occlusion. Right. Your blood pressure is so high, blood is not moving anywhere. And so in the middle of a very heavy set, especially complex movements, especially when they're loaded on your body, this can be an overhead press or squat variations, anything like that. Blood pressure is going to be a problem. And the reason why that matters is that's what's going to make you pass out. It's not the fact that you ran out of oxygen in 3 seconds. It's the fact that blood pressure got so high you blacked out. And so we're going to have to play this game of releasing a little bit of the pressure so we can actually get blood to move a little bit, making sure that we don't lose spinal stability so we can finish our workout.

Andy Galpin: That's really the question you asked, right? How do I play this game of, oh, I have several hundred pounds on my back or my chest? And I don't want to exhale so that I don't lose spinal stability, but at the same time, I don't want to pass out, which is a problem. So kind of a couple of rules of thumb. If you're going to be doing something in which you can complete the entire exercise without a breath, and it is of a maximal or close to load, that's probably your best strategy. So in that particular case, you'll see a lot of breathing techniques where you're going to take a very large inhale. Ideally, this is done through the abdomen, not the shoulders, so we shouldn't see clavicles rising during this thing. You'll see a common mistake of the bars on their back, and you see people do this, like, big inhale thing and all they do is elevate their clavicles. That's not necessarily going to increase pressure through the abdomens, which is what you're looking for. So you want to be thinking about belly moving out in all four areas in front of you, to your left and right and to your back.

Andy Galpin: That's that quadrant sort of idea of stabilizing your spine. You can do that independent of your clavicles moving. Your shoulders don't need to rise for that. You don't really need the oxygen for metabolic purposes. You're just using the air for a brace. That's really all you're after.
Andrew Huberman: Not to get overly detailed, but I think there are going to be a number of people wondering about how to creatine during repetitions and how to creatine in between sets. So I'd like to just briefly touch on this, and this is something that I know we're going to return to again when we have our discussion about recovery. But is there a general rule of thumb for how to breathe during repetitions during work? For strength, maybe even strength versus hypertrophy in a way that maximizes oxygen input to the system, keeps you alert, Andy, conscious. But that also protects the body by creating some rigidity in the system, because certainly, being with all your air exhaled, the body is a very different beast in terms of stability than with the body full of air versus creatine during the repetition movement.

Andy Galpin: There's a maneuver that has long been labeled the Valsalva technique. So what that really means is you're trying to use air to create intra abdominal pressure. Andy, what you're really trying to do is create a cylinder around your spine. The real issue you have to play here is regulation of blood pressure and spinal stability. Now, you should be able to breathe andy, brace. What I mean by that is you should be able to create total intra abdominal pressure, regulate spine control while breathing. It's just very hard for a lot of people to do it's a skill you should absolutely work on. You can actually you can do this, and you can go around like, I do this trick in class, and students can come and push any part of my entire abdomen super tight, and I can talk now. It's going to be a little bit labored. You can hear a little bit of a difference, but you should be able to do that if you have to hunch down and you can't even muster a breath. And it takes that to create pressure there, you don't really understand the abdominal control necessary to create that stability. So step number one is that's the goal now with the blood pressure thing, we have to be careful because a standard blood pressure, ideally, if we sat around right now, it's probably something like 120 over 80.
Andy Galpin: Start to finish is the better way to think about it. Yeah, I'll clarify. Actually, when we say three one one, we're generally talking about almost always the eccentric is the slower portion, regardless if it's the first or the last. Right. So whether you're doing a bench press where the eccentric is lowering the bar to your chest, that's the first part of the movement. One, two, three, pause one one up, which means accelerate as hard as you can the way up.

Andrew Huberman: That's what you describe as opposed to, say a row.

Andy Galpin: A row, which is actually going to be starting off concentric. So you're going to be pulling that thing to your chest as fast as you can, under control, not slamming off your chest, holding for 1 second and then taking 3 seconds to lower it back on the rack or on the ground or whatever. So the reason we do that is somewhat intuitive, but it is, again, to make sure you're not advancing a bar or an implement onto your physical body at an extremely fast rate. That's very difficult to deal with. So a three one one is a very standard strength protocol. That is something you can just run with. If that's all you ever wanted to do, it'd be absolutely fine.

Andrew Huberman: Lower the bar for a count of three. It actually ends up being approximately three. Hardly anybody is counting off seconds precisely. I suppose it's doable, but then pausing briefly.

Andy Galpin: Yes. And that pause is almost unmeasurable. It is simply, are you under control? Before you transition from the eccentric to concentric or concept, it's just a safety thing. So once you feel down, you've reached complete range of motion, you're ready to transition, then just go. You don't really need to go like, thousand watts and then go up. It's just making sure. Again, we don't slam weights off of.

Andrew Huberman: Body parts and that fine. Final one in the three one one is really as fast as the execution of the usually concentric portion of the exercise. Yes.

Andy Galpin: As fast as you possibly can.

Andrew Huberman: Okay. So that would be for the majority of the outcome being strength.

Andy Galpin: Yes. Okay.
Andy Galpin: Triphasic, one, two, three. Eccentric, isometric, concentric. So that's a fantastic way of developing, actually, strength, a little bit of hypertrophy, but you're manipulating the variables in terms of how you execute the repetition range. You can actually induce a lot of hypertrophy. Moving the weight fast, as you mentioned, even down slow. Andy control. Now, one thing one will never advocate is moving any sort of weight or load uncontrolled. The assumption here when I'm saying go fast is you're always in control. I never want you bouncing and crushing your sternum with the barbell off your desk, but you can move at a lot of rates. The isometric I mentioned, because this is when things like body weight training come into play. Absolutely. You can gain strength, Andy, even a little bit of hypertrophy, especially in the upper body. Doing isometrics. It's much harder to do this with the lower body. You outrun that coverage really quickly. You need load. But there's a lot of ways this is also probably why people have done things like gone to yoga only or Pilates or some of these things that are body weight based and there's no external load and they've actually increased muscle size.

Andrew Huberman: So I'm getting the picture. There are a ton of options in terms of rep cadences. However, can we say that one should pick a given rep cadence within an exercise rather than changing it from set to set within an exercise? Or that one should perhaps even pick a certain rep cadence for an entire workout? I'm suspecting that your answer is going to be, it depends.

Andy Galpin: Yeah, it is.

Andrew Huberman: But I'm not going to use if you had a gun to your head kind of situation. But if you had a gun to your head, what would be the rep cadence that you would prescribe for strictly strength or as much strength with as little hypertrophy as possible. And in picking that rep cadence, then it therefore has to thread throughout the entire exercise bout.

Andy Galpin: So you're actually right, because of that undulating periodization stuff I talked about, you can actually do this in a lot of ways. So you could do one exercise at the beginning where you have a set cadence, say three one. One is like a very one.

Andrew Huberman: So that's lifting for three, pause for one, lower for one, generally the opposite. Okay, so the first number is always the eccentric, generally. Okay. Lowering the weight for a count of three, pause for one.

Andy Galpin: It totally depends on the exercise. Like a deadlift starts concentric and finishes eccentric, but a bench press starts the opposite.

Andrew Huberman: Okay, so start to finish.
Andrew Huberman: Is there a way that you could lay out for us optimal repetition, cadences for strength, specifically, versus hypertrophy specifically, just to sort of bookend the conversation and then migrate toward the middle in terms of rep cadences that would satisfy the desire to have a bit of both?

Andy Galpin: We can get pretty close. Yeah. So when you're talking about strength versus hypertrophy, remember, strength is movement. Hypertrophy is muscle size. That's the key to your answer here. So when you're trying to get stronger, what you're effectively trying to do is get better at producing a certain amount of force through movement. Now, force is mass times acceleration. So what's the mass in the bar multiplied by how well, I can accelerate it intentionally? Going slower is only reducing acceleration, right? So it's hard to argue that going slower is going to improve strength because you're simply reducing acceleration. So you need to practice lifting heavier at a faster rate. Now, does that mean if you're trying to get stronger, there are no phases of your training in which you'll slow down or pause? No, of course not. There are certain rules in different organizations where you have to pause the bottom. There's all kinds of little things like that. But in general, we want to think about what are we trying to do here?

Andy Galpin: We're trying to get better at moving a heavier mass at a faster rate of acceleration. That is, more force, that is more strength. Hypertrophy is not that the goal here is not a functional outcome. It is what is needed to cause the most amount of hypertrophy. And when you get to hypertrophy, then your optimal cadence is up to you. You can do any combination. In fact, you could do it the same exact cadence that you did your strength training with and get the same adaptations as typically if you modify the other variables appropriately. Or you could go slower, or you could do pauses, or you could do a thing that is called triphasic training, where you spend the first phase, several weeks of your training where you do eccentrics only. So you're just lowering the bar, and you're basically stopping. You can then do the next phase of your training, which is isometrics. You're just holding at that bottom position. Andy then the next phase of your training, you're focusing on the concentric portion of it, right?
Andy Galpin: By doing that extensive, you would have been better off starting your first working set slightly suboptimal, right? Because you're just trying to accrue volume at that point. Strength and power is the opposite. Until you're moving very, very fast or powerfully, you're not really causing the adaptation. So there's no point in starting your working set until you're really basically at 100%. So the warm up should be as long as it takes you to get to where your mobility is in the right spot. Like your joints feel good, you feel fresh, you feel activated, and you really feel peak power. Anything before that is a warm upset. In the sport of Olympic weightlifting, a lot of times the coaches will measure barbell velocity. Travis Mash has done a fantastic job with this. He's got a lot of data on what's called velocity based training. Brian mann at Missouri and Miami. Tons of work here. Andy generally, those communities are not going to count any repetition as a working set until you exceed 70% of your one rep max.

Andy Galpin: Where that's changed because of a lot of people doing the velocity based stuff is now they're basing that simply on an achieved velocity. And so really the warm up is irrelevant. It's sort of just like, do whatever you want, and we're going to measure the barbell until you actually hit an outcome. And now you're at what, a working set. So different ways to think about it, depending on what you're training for, that'll give you a little bit of a guideline. If you're training for anything past hypertrophy, then really, Andy, especially even hypertrophy, it just comes down to, are you feeling ready to work? Are you cold? Are you moving through the correct positions? Andy if all those things are fine, I don't care if you start a little bit early and save some gas, especially if you're a person like you who may be a bit more inclined to fatigue quickly relative to Trevor, who just has no response to fatigue whatsoever.

Andrew Huberman: Is it useful to do more warm up at the beginning of a workout, say, before the first exercise, and then once one has achieved both local and systemic warm up in air quotes, then perhaps on the second or third exercise, fourth exercise, et cetera. One or maybe even zero warm ups.

Andy Galpin: Yeah, fair point. We generally think about warm ups in a couple of ways. This is a very clever question. You want to have some sort of general global warm up scheme. We tend to prefer dynamic warm ups. So this is whole body movements rather than like sitting and stretching, static stretching, things like that.

Andrew Huberman: So something that involves momentum.
Andy Galpin: It's a different style of conditioning. It's power endurance is really what it is. He called me in the middle of it. Andy I'm like, oh, we're done. Whatever. And he's just like, no, how many of these am I supposed to do? And I was like, what are you talking about? He's like, I'm on rep 130 or something. And I was like, what? And I'm like, what rep did you peek on? He peaked on rep 70, something like that. 69, I think technically because he's goofy. So he's a classic example I've worked in for many, many years. We have a ton of data on him, a ton of biological data, a ton of neurological stuff, like all kinds of stuff. And it just the more he warms up, an absurd amount of warm up, the better he gets. And the better he gets in power production and the better he gets in speed and velocity. So his warm up prior to games is totally absurd and just the more volume we throw at him, the better he does.

Andy Galpin: I have other folks, you get past like two or three reps and fatigue starts to set in, and now you're actually like reducing power production. So there is a ton of variation that goes into that. I can give you some guidelines, though. You need to differentiate if you're training for speed, power, strength, or hypertrophy. Here's why. If we understand a little bit about what's causing the adaptation, that's going to tell you what you need to do or avoid. For example, volume is the primary driver in hypertrophy. Intensity is the primary driver in speed, power, and strength. What that means is you need to preserve intensity for the first three. You need to preserve volume in the second one at most. So if your warm up is so extensive in the hypertrophy training that it compromises your training volume because of fatigue, even if it compromises the last set of the last exercise, then you're actually probably walking yourself backwards.
Andrew Huberman: Terrific. What about warming up? I was taught that one should do higher repetition movements with lighter weights in order to warm up. And then one of the things that did make a big positive difference for me in terms of strength and hypertrophy training was to do a moderate repetition warm up with a fairly lightweight but then to actually keep the number of warm up repetitions fairly low. Andy, work progressively toward the first so called work set. When you say three to five, that's three to five work sets, correct?

Andy Galpin: Yes.

Andrew Huberman: Are you also going to tell me three to five warm ups?

Andy Galpin: No.

Andrew Huberman: Are you also going to tell me it has to be done between three and 05:00. P.m. So in terms of three to five friends, in all seriousness, what does a good warm up look like? And I realize this will vary depending on how cool your training environment is, time of day, et cetera, but as a kind of umbrella for a good warm up, okay, what should people do?

Andy Galpin: You've already sort of jumped the gun with my answer. It is honestly very dependent upon the person. So some folks respond very well to a minimum warm up. Others I've had lots of actually professional fighters I've worked with where I actually have a Major League baseball player right now. He's one of the best pitchers in the game, probably the best. Andy the longer we warm up, the better his numbers get. We actually did a vertical jump test with him. He's going to kill me because he got so mad. I wanted to see how long it sort of took him to reach a peak vertical jump. And most times this takes people something like five to ten sort of reps. And I said, take it up all the way to a maximum vertical jump. And then what I want you to do is continue to jumping until you have three consecutive jumps or you're down lower than 90%. Andy so what we're trying to look at is sort of when is he going to break? Because in baseball he's going to throw like 100 pitchers or so. And we're trying to figure out when is his peak velocity on his fastball going to drop and sort of base his conditioning on that?
Andrew Huberman: Speaking of tracking weight and fat, lean mass percentages, is that something that you recommend your patients do pretty often? I know people that step on the scale every day. I know people like myself that, frankly, I might step on the scale three times a year. I don't really care. I pay attention to other things that are far more subjective. Maybe I'm making a huge mistake. What are your thoughts about quantitative measurements of weight BMI for the typical person?

Peter Attia: I think they're pretty crude. I'd rather take a Dexa annually and then maybe follow weight a little bit more closely to get a sense of it. And so with a Dexa, you're getting, at least the way we look at the data, four pieces of information. Now, most people, when they do a Dexa, should I explain what that is?

Andrew Huberman: Yeah, I think some people might not know what Dexa is. In fact, I confess I have a crude understanding of what it is. Tell me of where I'm wrong and hopefully where I'm at least partially right. My understanding is that there are a number of different ways to measure lean mass to non lean mass ratio. And there's one where they put you underwater, there's one where they put you into some sort of non underwater chamber. There's calipering, and then there's the looking in the mirror and pinching and changing the lighting.

Peter Attia: It's funny, if you've done it enough, I can sort of tell my body fat by my ABS, right? So I can sort of tell by how good the six pack or how bad the six pack is, what the leanness is, and that's actually not a terrible way to do it. A bodybuilder, for example, which I've never been, can tell you the difference between being 6-7-8 10%, just based on the degree of visibility within the ABS. But basically, a Dexa scan is an X ray. So it's the same principle as just getting a chest X ray where ionizing radiation is passed through the body and there's a plate behind the body that collects what comes through. And the denser, the medium that the electrons are trying to go through, the less of them that are collected. So when you look at an X ray, as everybody's probably seen an X ray, that which is white is most dense. So if you had a piece of metal in your pocket, it would show up as a bright white thing. That's why ribs and bones show up as white. And the things that are the least dense, like the lungs, where it's just air, are the blackest, and everything is a shade of gray in between. So a Dexa is just doing that effectively, but it's a moving X ray. So you lay down on a bed, and it takes maybe ten minutes. And this little very low power X ray kind of goes over your body, and the plate beneath it is collecting information that is basically allowing it to differentiate between three things bone mineral content, fat, other. And the other is quantified as lean body mass. So that's organs, muscles, everything else. So when most people do a Dexa, they get the report back, and the reports are horrible.
Andy Galpin: There's many, many of them, but the two that have the most scientific literature are what's called linear periodization, and another is called undulating, or often daily undulating periodization. And I'm flagging these two again, despite the fact there are many, many, many more because they represent two different concepts, what you actually just touched upon. So linear periodization is a hallmarked by basically saying we're going to train one adaptation at a time. So imagine going say, six to eight weeks, and you're only doing strength, or you're only doing hypertrophy or endurance for that matter. So in that particular case, you would not do anything else in combination. If you contrast that to undulating periodization, you would actually be doing multiple different styles of training either within the same day or just different days. So it could be Monday is power, Wednesday is strength, friday is hypertrophy, whatever, or it could be a little bit of strength every single day, a little bit hypertrophy every day, a little bit of power every day, and you would just change the amount of each that you do within the day to alter the emphasis.

Andy Galpin: All right, now, if you look at the studies, and there have been many RCTs on this, the result of both of these training programs is generally basically the same thing. They are equally effective. Here's the major difference, though. One, if your goal is very specific to one outcome, you want to hedge towards specificity. So if you're like, hey, I'm trying to maximize the amount of muscle I can build in the next eight weeks, then you don't really anything else besides that is just distraction and potential interference. Does it really matter or not? Doesn't matter, but it's not helping anything else. So linear periodization is fundamental at providing focus, and therefore the adaptations tend to be oftentimes larger in that specific area. The downside is you now go six to eight to ten weeks of doing nothing else. Andy so you are losing those other adaptations that are great at a faster rate. And you can imagine doing something like speed work, only again, speed work by definition is non fatiguing. So when oftentimes we think of speed work as like, oh, I did ladder drills and I did all these things, andy, I threw up at the end.
Andy Galpin: You're doing three exercises, you're going to do three sets of three, which is a very, very low volume, it's a very low amount of days, easy to handle all the way to five sets of five of five exercises five days a week. So again, it's just one sample. That's something easy to remember. Andy is quite effective for a very long time and this has been tested quite extensively in both the coaching realms as well as the scientific realms to be quite productive and easy to follow Andy grasp. If you do that, all you need to do is slightly increase the load or the volume, but mostly the load over time and the number we want to look for there is something like a three to 5% increase per week. So an example would be if you're going to do an exercise at 100, you can't necessarily just add 5 every week that's going to touch you pretty quickly and so you may have to run some smaller increment.

Andy Galpin: If you're doing like a lower body exercise where you might have a couple of hundred pounds on the weight, you can probably get away with adding 5 because it's still a low percentage of the total load. So that's roughly the guide that we want to get to for speed, power and strength.

Andrew Huberman: So that sounds incredibly simple and effective yet I have a number of questions sure. First off, if somebody is using the three to five approach, does that mean they should not be doing any other weight training of Andy kind in those workouts or at all?

Andy Galpin: No, you can certainly do that in combination with anything else you would like, especially if you think about speed and power. Those are very non fatiguing. And so if you can imagine, you're going to go to the beach and you're going to take a ten pound to 20 pound medicine ball with you, and you're going to do four different exercise science. You're throwing the medicine ball as high as you can in the air, four times in a row, taking a break, and you do two or three sets of that. Andy you do maybe three or four different types of throws. S, that's very good for improving power, extremely good, but it's not very fatiguing. So you could certainly finish that workout in 20 minutes and then run on and then do any number of other things. So you could do some high intensity anaerobic capacity work, you could do steady state stuff. You could even do hypertrophy on top of that. So there's two major categories of what we call periodization.
Andrew Huberman: So just to interrupt briefly and make sure that I and everybody else have in mind the proper nine adaptations that we've been referring to and that were discussed in detail in episode one, I have listed number one, skill and technique. Number two, speed. Number three, power, which is speed times force. Number four, strength. Number five, hypertrophy. Number six, muscular endurance. Number seven, anaerobic capacity. Number eight, maximal aerobic capacity. And number nine, long duration steady state exercise.

Andy Galpin: Yes, you nailed it. Thank you for that. It was probably important clarification for everybody. So that being said, let's jump right into speed and power. Now, I'll do these a little bit simultaneously. They are different. If you're a high performance athlete, you really need to separate these two things. For most people, though, we can probably think about them as the same thing. There's not a lot of pure speed training that the general public is interested in. If you want to actually further break down speed, there are multiple components. There's acceleration, there's top end velocity, there's change of direction or agility and things like that. So we'll just kind of call all that speed and power for now. Now, at the onset, there's this three to five concept that we talked about many times where this is really fairly true for speed, power or strength. Now, I didn't develop the three to five. It's just an easy way to help you remember one concept that will run true across all these things. So three to five refers to three to five days per week.

Andy Galpin: Pick three to five exercises and you're going to do three to five repetitions per set. You'll do three to five sets and you'll rest three to five minutes between each set. If you do that and you execute any of the exercises that you choose at a high intent and that part is critical you don't get faster by moving kind of fast, you can't improve power by moving like powerfully. You have to be trying regardless of whether you're actually moving faster or not. Anytime you're talking about speed or power, you're by definition using sub maximal weights so you're going to be able to lift it. That's not the question. The question is how fast can you lift that implement? And so intention is incredibly important. So if you do that the same for strength, by the way, so if you land on that, that allows you to run the gamut from as little as three days a week.
Andrew Huberman: I'd like to take a brief break to acknowledge our sponsor, Inside Tracker. Inside Tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long term health and well being can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. One issue with a lot of blood tests and DNA tests out there, however, is that you get information back about various levels of lipids and hormones and metabolic factors, et cetera, but you don't know what to do with that information. Inside Tracker makes knowing what to do with all that information exceedingly easy.

Andrew Huberman: They have a personalized platform that lets you see what your specific numbers are, of course, but then also what sorts of behavioral do's and don'ts, what sorts of nutritional changes, what sorts of supplementation would allow you to bring those levels into the ranges that are optimal for you. If you'd like to try Inside Tracker, you can visit Insidetracker.com Huberman to get 20% off any of Inside Tracker's plans. Again, that's Insidetracker.com Huberman to get 20% off.
Andy Galpin: Okay? So that being said, what is skeletal muscle hypertrophy in general? We think about it as this increase in contractile proteins. So those myosin Andy galpin effectively get thicker. Now, what happens is, since they are thicker, and as I talked about a second ago, that influences and actually hurts the lattice spacing. Andy so what your body does as a result is say, hey, let's increase the diameter of the entire cell so that we can maintain our spacing between these things, right? It's effectively like if the two of us were sitting in this room, andy, you doubled in size, and I was like, whoa, you're in my personal space and I doubled in size. Now we're in each other's space. At some point, we just have to make the room larger, and that's exactly what's happening in the cell. And so as you can continue to increase muscle size, you're. Going to get muscle myofibular accretion. You're going to continue to increase muscle fiber size for years.

Andy Galpin: There was this other comment about nonfunctional hypertrophy and this is often called Sarcoplasmic hypertrophy. Now, this is not Sarcoplasmic reticulum. This is the fancy way of saying my muscle is larger but it has no function. And the question would be, well, how the hell is that possible if I have more contractile units and I can make more of these cross bridges, perform more of these power strokes is what these contractions are called, how could I possibly be losing function? Well, that was challenged. That was bro science for a very, very long time. In fact, what it really came down to was are there different types of hypertrophy training? Some that induce contractile protein hypertrophy and some that induce the Sarcoplasmic hypertrophy and that was significantly challenged until recently. Mike Roberts at Auburn did a series of wonderful studies that showed quite clearly that Sarcoplasmic hypertrophy is probably happening. And in fact, there's probably a pretty easy explanation.

Andy Galpin: In general, what happens is it is an increase in fluid in the muscle fiber and so this would allow for the diameter to be larger. But since there is no addition of contractile units, no more force production happens. And so he actually has a wonderful review paper, I believe it's open access where you can go look and he created a wonderful graph. I think that's in my hypertrophy videos on YouTube as well. And you can actually see that it's likely happening in phasic changes throughout your training experience. So at the beginning of your training but as the years and weeks rather than months and then eventually years go by in your training we have a change in the hypertrophy that's coming from contractile units versus Sarcoplastic. So I think that is an important note because again, people are wondering like well, how the hell is it even possible for me to get larger muscle and somehow I'm not stronger?

Andy Galpin: Well, if it came from simply fluid retention and this is not bloating, there's no negative really to this. It is simply holding of more hydration in the cell. The AMR gets larger and then everything works that way.

Andrew Huberman: What you just described calls to mind something similar in the nervous system, which is neuroplasticity, which of course is the nervous system's ability to change in response to learning and experience andy damage for that matter. Andy we think about it as one term but there are many different forms of neuroplasticity. A discussion that we don't need to get into now but there's spike timing dependent plasticity and Ltp and long term depression which has nothing to do with psychological depression. And on andy impaired pulse facilitation and on and on and on andy short term plasticity. What I'm starting to understand is that there are many paths to what we call strength increase and there are many paths to what we think of as hypertrophy many of these are going to operate in parallel. It's going to be rare that any one of them is going to be active alone in order to create hypertrophy or strength changes. And that certain forms of exercise and certain ways of doing exercises in terms of sets. Andy repetition schemes and rest intervals between sets and between training sessions are going to tap into different mechanisms, but also overlapping sets of mechanisms.

Andrew Huberman: Which is why, if I understand correctly, you mentioned at the beginning that often not always, but often, strength increases are associated with some hypertrophy changes and hypertrophy increases are often not always associated with strength increases. Do I have that right?
Andy Galpin: It doesn't matter if that protein is going to be a red blood cell. It doesn't matter if that's going to be a hair follicle. It doesn't matter if it's going to be skeletal muscle. That's basically protein synthesis. So when we tend to think of protein synthesis, we just paint this picture of growing more muscle. And that's not the only thing. And so when we talk about the benefits of having high quality muscle as being this place that's going to regulate most of your protein synthesis, we tend to lose some people because they're thinking, oh, I don't need to gain muscle. And that's not what we're talking about. We're talking about regulating the immune system. We're talking about regulating any protein turnover. So, Andy, protein that's degradated or needs to be broken down in your system at all, autophagy, this is such an important buzzword that's just protein breakdown of an unneeded or damaged protein, right?

Andy Galpin: That whole thing is going to go through protein synthesis to be able to come back and replace the things. The only reason you go through autophagy is so you can clean that garbage out and then come back and build in a more properly functioning protein. So it's not just about growing more muscle mass. It's why you want these systems to be operating well. So the protein ingestion is going to just activate that cascade because it's basically saying, oh, hey, look, we have an abundance of supply here, why don't we make something out of it? Because we don't know the next time this thing is going to be around carbohydrates andy fat are very easy to store. Protein is very challenging. It's more transient. And so you can store some of it and keep it around, but most of it you're going to lose. And so when it's available, your body wants to act very quickly. It doesn't necessarily care if you have extra fat floating around in your system. It's all right, let's just package it up and store it.

Andy Galpin: We can easily bring this back out. But if you got protein around, you're going to want to use it. And so that's why it alone will activate. Andy increase protein synthesis independent of exercise. So those effects are additive, like I said, because that signaling process is independent. And once you hit a rate limiting phase, then you are there. But at its onset, those things will work independently.
Andrew Huberman: Could you just highlight for people what this is? Because as you describe these signaling pathways, I just want to maybe just put a top contour explanation. The mtor pathway is synonymous with cell growth, both during development as organisms, humans included, mature and cells get larger. Mtor is abundant in the system, to put it quite simply. And then the ampk pathway and some of the metabolic signaling that you're referring to is more synonymous with cardiovascular exercise, at least in the context of this discussion. Andy fuel periodization and what you described as a crossover point where certain forms of exercise can tap into both of these. But at least for sake of this conversation, we're largely separating them.

Andy Galpin: Yeah, because the byproduct is the thing that matters here. So the result of mtor and Akt getting into the nucleus is going to be an increase in protein synthesis. The result of ampk running down to the is going to be result in increasing mitochondrial biogenesis. So the net outcome is different. Now, I do want to flag it very quickly. This is an extraordinarily complicated thing, Andy. In fact, in our laboratory, we were able to be one of the first that figured out how to measure all the different subunits of ampk and individual muscles by fiber type.

Andrew Huberman: As you're ripping people's muscles out of their knees, Andy, their patellar tendons just teasing. They're gently removing under IRB protocol, of course.

Andy Galpin: So even when we say something like ampk, it's not one thing. And when we say things like mtor, it's not one thing either. You have the total amount that matters. You have the activation. The activation sites are many of them. So it's not as simple as what I'm laying it out. I just want to get a big concept of kind of what's happening here to actually kind of answer your question, which is, okay, so how is the muscle actually growing? What you have to understand is a little bit of how protein synthesis occurs. So what I'm generally meaning is you have a whole bunch of amino acids, and this actually goes back to maybe like middle school biology class, right? So if you take a bunch of amino acids and you combine them together, we get these things called a peptide, right? Andy if anyone has never heard of, like, peptides, that's all it really means. You put a bunch of those together, you have a polypeptide, you put a bunch of those together, and we now have a protein. So any protein I want to make is going to go through the exact same system, the exact same steps.
Andrew Huberman: I can't help but ask, is the same true if one does endurance type exercise? If I go out for a 45 minutes jog where I can nasal breathe the whole time, but if I were to go any faster, I would have to kick over into mouth breathing as well. So called zone two ish cardio. Will I see an increase in protein synthesis simply as a consequence of that?

Andy Galpin: Jog no. This is one of the unique factors of strength training. You're not going to see that. In fact, you would it's difficult to measure protein breakdown. That's been as extraordinarily challenging to do in the laboratory. But you're not going to see those benefits. In fact, you're going to see quite the opposite. It's an entire molecular cascade. So this is kind of how it works. So you have to have some sort of signal on the outside and this can be an energetic signal. So this could be glucose uptake, it could be protein intake, it could be a physical stretch. What happens is on the cell wall, there is some sort of it could be testosterone, right? Testosterone could bind to beta adrenergic receptors and this activates a whole series of cascades of signaling proteins. And these proteins basically play a game of telephone. So one tells the next one, they tells the next one, and they sort of walk this entire way.

Andy Galpin: Well, that molecular cascade is fundamentally the same thing, regardless of the insult. But they're different pathways. And so the pathway from strength training or protein ingestion is going to go to the same nucleus. It's going to activate a whole set of gene cascades that are going to tell you to go through this entire process of protein synthesis, which I'll walk through what that is in a second. If you do endurance training, it's a different pathway. And so instead of activating this entire thing of like Mtor and Akt and this anabolic signaling cascade, it's going to do a different one, which you can think of more of like as ampk, an energy signaling thing. So there's a crossover point here. In fact, one of the things you'll notice is Mtor and Akt don't really influence ampk. But there is some literature that years ago showed ampk will activate another protein called TSC Two and that will actually inhibit Mtor. And that was the first molecular explanation for the quote unquote interference effect of endurance training on hypertrophy.
Andrew Huberman: But since we're free to do what we would do if we were just sitting in each other's offices, which is to just speculate a bit for the typical person, do you think these low carbohydrate diets typical person who? Exercises, runs, swims, yoga, lifts, weights maybe not all those things, but some collection of those pushes themselves to do those things and to do them well. But isn't necessarily a highly competitive athlete. Do you think that nutrition that doesn't include a lot of glucose, doesn't include a lot of carbohydrates is a problem, or is it okay, what do you recommend for athletes? What do you recommend for typical people?

Duncan French: Yeah, again, disclaimer, I'm not a dietitian. That's okay.

Andrew Huberman: The dietitians don't know what to recommend to athletes either. And I say that from having spent a lot of time with the literature. Now it's a complete mess. It's like, I thought we didn't understand anything about the brain. The nutrition science stuff is all over the place, right. So I think we have, again, large degrees of freedom.

Duncan French: I think it comes down to metabolic efficiency. So we would never we would never advocate a high I never say never. Okay. But, you know, we rarely advocate a high performance athlete in a in a high intensity, intermittent sport like MMA being totally ketogenic, or you do not recommend that? No, because at the end of the day, some of those high intensity efforts usually require carbohydrate fueling for the energy to be produced at those high intensities. So we try to navigate around that. Now that listen, there are fighters in the UFC and elsewhere. Matt Brown is a great example who promotes the ketogenic approach, and it works for him. But we look at the science and the nature, the characteristics of our sport, and we don't necessarily promote that.

Andrew Huberman: Can I interrupt you real quick? What about ketones? For people that are ingesting carbohydrates, this is an interesting area, because people always hear ketones, and they think, oh, I have to be ketogenic to benefit from taking ketones. But there are a number of athletes and recreational athletes now as well, taking liquid or powder based ketones, even though they do eat rice and oatmeal and bread and other things.
Andrew Huberman: Would you say that what comes to mind is twelve weeks? It feels like twelve weeks is a nice block of time for someone to try something in terms of to try something new, see how they adapt, adapt and then maybe switch to something new. I realize that it's very hard to throw a kind of pan time frame around something, but in terms of if someone wanted to experiment with heat adaptation or experiment with cold adaptation or change up their training regimen or diet and look at metabolic efficiency. Do you think twelve weeks is a good period of time to really give something a thorough go and gain an understanding of how well or how poorly something works for oneself? Or would you say eight is enough or three?

Duncan French: That's how long is a piece of string kind of response, right? I mean, yes, if we're just talking arbitrary recreational experiment. Three months exposure, twelve week training strategy. Twelve week intervention is more than adequate to say for 99% of things that change within the body that physiologically adapt to a training stimulus or an overload stimulus. You're going to start to see either regression or progression, beneficial or detrimental effects within three months. Absolutely. I would say now listen, I say that in as much as we do training blocks here that are three weeks long, right?

Andrew Huberman: That's because of this constraint that sometimes people suddenly have to they get the call to fight, correct?

Duncan French: Yeah. So it's like super condensed. And in that scenario we're always conscious of is their body or this individual, do they have the ability to tolerate that super overload, that like super condensed exposure? Now, we might be doing that purposefully. We might be trying to do an overreaching strategy where we're really trying to damage or flex something. And I don't mean negatively damage, but we're trying to damage tissue to really get an adaptive response versus a more drawn out twelve week strategy, which is more coherent, more planned out, more structured in nature. But yeah, for all your listeners, I would say twelve weeks to engage in a process of trying to change and adapt your body or expose yourself to something is more than sufficient to see if it's going to be the right approach for you. And I think the individual interpretation always has to be considered. And I think that's where it comes back.

Duncan French: To be a thinking man's athlete or be a thinking man's trainer, like someone that's going through exercise, you have to consciously understand where your body's at any moment in time. You've got to be real with yourself. You can create a journal, create a log of your training, create a log of your feelings, your subjective feedback of how you felt, your mood, your sleep.

Andrew Huberman: Your athletes do that.

Duncan French: Yeah, we try to promote that, because, again, that's part of this process. Maybe twelve weeks for you, but I might get the same responses in eight weeks. And I think that's another critical theme here, is that we could put 15 guys on the mat and give them the same workout, and there's going to be 15 different responses to that same workout. Because the human organism is so complex and in nature that it's going to adapt differently. Some people will tolerate it. Some people are going to be challenged by it. Some people have got a metabolic makeup that's going to promote it. Some people are metabolically challenged by it. There's just so many different things that we have to consider, and that's what we try to do here. It's the cross we bear, is that we try to understand on an individual level how to optimize athletic performance.

Andrew Huberman: I think it's terrific, and the athletes here are so fortunate to have this, and most people out there, I've certainly been trying to encourage people to learn some science and some mechanism and become scientists of their own pursuits, whether or not skill learning or athletic pursuit, et cetera.
Duncan French: 200 Fahrenheit, yes. And we try to work up to 30 to 40 minutes to 45 minutes in the Sauna continuous. Now we have to understand what's the advantage of heat acclimation for our athletes. Ultimately, their ability to heat and to lose body fluids is going to be advantageous to their weight cut process, their ability to make weight. It is a technique that some of these guys adopt. So if you don't have high sweat rates, it means you're going to have to sit in the Sauna for longer and longer and longer to get the same delta in sweat release. So the more acclimated you are, the more your body is, thermogenemogenically adapted, the more sweat glands you have, the small pores, you can sweat more and therefore you'll lose that fluid quicker and you spend less time in the sauna. So that's why we do it, to try and promote, to limit the exposure. And it comes back to your first question is it a stressor? Absolutely it's a stressor.

Duncan French: If you've got to spend 2 hours over a four hour period, 2 hours of it sat in a Sauna where.

Andrew Huberman: The phone doesn't work. So you can't people just force them from their phone. And that's a stressor in itself, right?

Duncan French: Yes. I think what we do is like anything, we build up in temperature, but we build up in volume of exposure. So we start with 15 minutes and then we just try to add on and add on across the time. And now for us, we kind of found about 14 cold exposure starts to really then drive the adaptations that we're looking for. So it's not a quick fix. A heat acclimation strategy has to happen long before fight week or long before the fight. This is a process that has to begin eight to ten weeks before the fight so that we can actually get that adaptation and that tolerance to the stressor, to the exposure of heat.

Andrew Huberman: That's interesting. Until today when we talked about this earlier and again now, I didn't realize that, but it makes perfect sense now that I heat it. That heat adaptation is possible, that you basically can train the body to become better at cooling itself, which is what sweating is. I should have known that before. But you don't see that in the textbooks.

Duncan French: Listen, it's the same as the Ketogenic conversation. You're training your body to be more metabolic efficient. You're training your body to tolerate heat more. You're training your butt as an organism, as an organic system. It's hugely adaptable. It's usually plastic. But I think the skill is understanding the whens, the whys and the whereofs in terms of changing the overload, changing the stimulus to drive specific adaptation. And philosophically, that's how we go about our work here. We talk about adaptation Led programming. Now, adaptation Led programming fits into every single category, not just lifting weights or running track. It fits into nutrition, it fits into sitting in the Sauna. It fits into being in a cold bath or not it fits into so many different things because we're driven by scientific insights and that's how we really want to go about our business.

Andrew Huberman: I love it. I love this concept of adaptation led programming and doing that not just in the context of throwing another plate on the bar or something like that, but in every aspect of one's training and performance. And I think there's a lot here that's applicable to the recreational athlete, too.
Andrew Huberman: I can't help myself. I know we talked about temperature earlier when we discussed cold, but I can't help myself. I have to ask you about heat because earlier we were having a conversation about heat adaptation, about how long does it take for the huberman body or athlete or typical person that's maybe exploring sauna or things of that sort to learn to be a better sweater. It sounds like something none of us would want to do. We all want to stay cool, calm and collected. But one of the reasons to deliberately expose oneself to heat is for things like growth hormone release, et cetera. We can talk about this, but a couple of questions. One is heat exposure stress in the same way that the ice bath or cold exposure is stress. The second one is, is there any difference there? That's important. And the other one is, how does one get better at heat adaptation? Or at least what are you doing with the fighters to get them better at dealing with heat? How long does that take? So the first question, just because I threw three questions at you, is heat stress?

Andrew Huberman: Like cold is stress?

Duncan French: Yeah, I think it is. And I think heat shock proteins, for example, are driven by that stressful exposure to a changing environment. So I think we do graded response in terms of heat acclimation strategies. But yes, we've touched on it earlier in the conversation. For me, heat is still a stressor, and if it's managed incorrectly, you can have detrimental responses rather than beneficial responses.

Andrew Huberman: So barring like hyperthermia and heat, obviously, you heat up the brain too much, people will have seizures and die, but you lose neurons. But what's the right way to acclimate heat, taking into account that people should check with their doctor, et cetera. We do all these disclaimers, but let's say let's just say I want to get better at dealing with heat, or I want to extract more benefit from heat. How many minutes a day are people typically exposing themselves to heat? How often and over what periods of time?

Duncan French: Yeah, so we normally start with about 15 minutes of exposure. Now, if someone's really lacking acclimation to heat, you can do that in three, five minute efforts, do you know what I mean? And actually take hot sauna. Yeah, hot sauna take time to step.

Andrew Huberman: 200 degrees or something like that.

Duncan French: Correct?

Andrew Huberman: Fahrenheit, yeah.
Andrew Huberman: Because, you know, one of the reasons I'm obsessed with with human performance and high performance and people like fighters and elite military or, or even bodybuilders for that matter, is that they they experiment. Yeah, they find the outer limits of what's possible. But one of the things that they have discovered, as you're describing, is this ability to toggle between high alert states and calm states. Most typical people can't do this. They see something that upsets them on the Internet or something on the news, or some external event pressures down on them, and they're stressed for many, many days and weeks, and sometimes it goes pathological, right. I don't say this as a criticism. It's just that most human beings within our species, most members of our species, never learn to either flip the switch or to just voluntarily toggle between states. I think athletes learn how to do that extremely well, and it sounds like MMA fighters do that even better than perhaps many other athletes.

Duncan French: I mean, yeah, there's the odd one or two that would struggle with, but I think in terms of that chronic exposure, we see that coming from challenges around cyclical weight cutting and metabolic disruption and metabolic injury, not necessarily from the psychological drive. They do understand that this is a job for them. And the time on the mats, most of them can turn it off a little bit and downgrade things when they're off the mats. It's impressive to see because, again, as a layman, just looking at the fight game, you think it's going to be crazy chaotic, 100 miles an hour, every hour of every day. But that's clearly not the case. They manage their energy and their efforts pretty well.

Andrew Huberman: So it's a little bit like science. Although maybe scientists could take a lesson.

Duncan French: From yeah, evidence based practice. Or practice based evidence.

Andrew Huberman: That's good. A couple more questions.
Andrew Huberman: I know you were at Notre Dame for a while. Was that your first spot after your PhD thesis?

Duncan French: No, I basically finished my PhD and I dropped into the British Olympic system. For about 14 years.

Andrew Huberman: Oh, my.

Duncan French: I've done three full Olympic cycles with different sports, and largely a strength and conditioning coach. As a practitioner, I was always working in universities and academia alongside in terms of continuing to publish and write and do research and teach as well, because.

Andrew Huberman: That explains the huge volume of publications. I don't think people realize the work that goes into getting a quality, peer reviewed publication. It's not what do they call it now on Instagram anecdata, where people do something, what they have this experience and then they put in the world anecdata are I don't even know that we could call it data. So, 14 years in working with the British Olympic team.

Duncan French: Yeah. So whether it was GB boxing, primarily with the Rio excuse me, the Beijing cycle, but also lightweight rowers and gymnastics for the London Olympic Games that cycle, I was the lead strength and conditioning and physical performance coach for British basketball. So GB basketball. I had about three years in the English Premier League with Newcastle United and the soccer team. And then for the Rio Olympic cycle, I was with Great Britain taekwondo. So, again, another combat sport. After I'd finished Thorne, I kind of moved to the University of Notre Dame, where I went into more of a more of a managerial position, working across all the different technical services, medical, nutrition, strength and conditioning, psychology, whatever it's sports science, whatever it may be, as the Director of Performance Sciences for Notre Dame athletics. And then after about 16 months there, the UFC came knocking and they recruited me out of Notre Dame. So it's been a great ride and I've got lots of athletes have taught me a lot along the way, lots of coaches.

Duncan French: Every day is a school day. I still try and keep that mentality, and in this world, we call it white belt mentality. I'm a PhD. I've got 25 years of experience in high performance sport, but I still learn every single day from these people out on the mats and in the ring. And it's impressive to see what they do.

Andrew Huberman: Yeah, it certainly is. I got introduced to MMA just a few years ago. I think the first time I came out here was one of the first times I had heard of MMA because I was kind of in my laboratory and nosed down. And it's a really interesting sport because it incorporates so many different types of movement. As you said, it's not just stand up boxing, it's just kicking, ground game, everything. And I'm still learning about it. But as you mentioned, going in with that beginner's mind, the white belt mentality, what has been the most surprising thing for you in terms of being exposed to MMA in particular, as opposed to other sports?
Andrew Huberman: Well, again, I'm smiling because I love this because it's grounded in something real and scientific, which is that we have these different fuel sources. The body can adapt to use any number of them or one of them. I think most people are looking for that one pattern of eating, that one pattern of exercising that's going to be best for them or sustain them. And they often look back to the time when they felt so much better switching from one thing to the next. But the adaptation process itself is also key, right, teaching the body. So if we were to just riff on this just a little bit further. If somebody I'll use myself as an example, since I can only speculate what other people's current nutrition protocols are. But if somebody is eating in a particular way and they want to try this kind of periodization of nutrition, could one say, okay, for a few weeks I'm going to do more high intensity interval training and weight training, and I'm going to eat a bit more carbohydrate because I'm depleting more glycogen.

Andrew Huberman: Then if I switch to a phase of my training where I'm doing some longer runs, maybe I'm training less. Maybe I'm just working at my desk a little bit more, then I might switch to a lower carbohydrate diet. Do I have that right? And then if I'm going to enter a competition of some sort, certainly not UFC or MMA of any kind, to be clear, not because it isn't a wonderful sport, but because that wouldn't be good for my other profession, but if I were going to do that, then I would think about stacking carbohydrates, ketones and fats. Do I have that?

Duncan French: More. I think, yeah, you just said it. Eloquently at the end of the day, you're consciously understanding what the exposure to physical exertion is and you're flexing your diet accordingly.

Andrew Huberman: So it's need based eating.

Duncan French: Exactly. For one of better terms, you can call it whatever fancy terminology there is out thorne. But yes, it's needs based eating. But you're very conscious and cognizant of what is my current exercise status? If I'm taking some time off, then don't gorge on the carbohydrates. We probably need to be cut. It's going to be lower intensity work or even just habitual day to day walking around doing your groceries. That doesn't require massive amounts of glycogen storage and carbohydrate fueling. So you can potentially go more ketogenic in nature, oxidizing lipids for that fuel. If you are in a high period of high intensity training, then you have to consciously flex your diet to support that. That's not normal. You've made a change, you've elevated the demand. So the fueling requirements for the regenerative not only fueling the exercise, but the regenerative requirements of your body after that type of work is going to be really important as well. So, yes, take on more carbohydrates. So I think it's consciously interpreting the nature of your diet against where you are at any moment in time like that.

Andrew Huberman: I think the listeners of my podcast generally are experimenters. They are scientists of themselves, which makes me happy, obviously, and I like to think that they're paying attention to the changes they're making and how they're affecting themselves and they seem more open to trying things, provide they can do it safely and seeing what works for them. And I'm certainly going to try some of the change up. I also am really a creature of habit and I think talking to you today, I realize I'm probably doing a number of things truly wrong in my training, but also that I don't tend to vary my nutrition with my training quite as much as I should. I'm just locked into a protocol. We cover a number of things related to your PhD thesis work, but I cut you off early on related to your trajectory after you finished your thesis.
Andrew Huberman: I think some people might be familiar with that term, some perhaps not. But the way I understand metabolic efficiency is that you teach the body to use. Fats by maybe doing long bouts of cardio, maybe lowering carbohydrates a bit. So teaching the body to tap into its fat stores for certain periods of training. And then you also teach the body to utilize carbohydrates by supplying carbohydrates immediately after training and before training. You teach the body to use ketones and then you use them at the appropriate time, as opposed to just deciding that one of these fuel sources is good and all the others are bad or dispensable. Do I have that correct?

Duncan French: You've nailed it. Bob Sibahar is formerly of USA. Triathlon is the guy that kind of came up with the concept of metabolic efficiency. But yes, you're absolutely right. I mean, at low intensities of exercise or just day to day living, we shouldn't be tapping into our carbohydrate fuel sources extensively that's for higher intensity work or the fight or flight needs of stress. If athletes or any individual has a high carbohydrate diet, they're going to start to become predisposed to utilizing that fuel source, preferentially now at low intensity. That can be problematic certainly for an athlete because if they preferentially use carbohydrate at lower intensities, when the exercise demand goes to a higher intensity, they've already exhausted their fuel stores. They can't draw upon fat because the oxidization of that fat is just too slow. So they're essentially now become fatigued because they've already utilized the carbohydrate stores. So what we tried to do, yes, through diet manipulation and a little bit of exercise manipulation, is, as you say, teach the body or train the body to preferentially use a specific fuel source, fat, obviously at lower intensities and carbohydrate at high intensities. And we would look at specifically the crossover point between the two tells a lot in terms of how an athlete is ultimately how their metabolism is working.
Andrew Huberman: So are there any known benefits of ketones, even if one is not in a state of ketosis?

Duncan French: The use of ketones that I'm primarily aware of in our sport is after the event in terms of the brain health, with athletes potentially taking trauma to the brain, et cetera, and looking to maintain the fueling and the energy supply to the brain. But, yes, it's probably a little bit out of my remit, so I don't want to talk on that because I'm not fully familiar with that.

Andrew Huberman: Well, I've heard that ketones after head injury can provide a buffering component. Correct. It's not going to reverse brain damage, but it might be able to offset some of the micro damage.

Duncan French: Right. So that's how we use it, just to sustain the energy supply to the brain that might be compromised through brain trauma. So that's why we use ketones. To come back to the original question, if it's a general population, then yes, I think there's a place to argue that actually being on a ketogenic diet at times, and maybe that's a cycling exercise, maybe not. I don't mean cycling a bike. I mean cycling ketones is beneficial because I think it's going to lead to better metabolic management and metabolic efficiency. Thorne lower intensities, where we should be fueling our metabolism with lipids and fats. Clearly, the Western diet and the modern day diet is heavily driven by processed foods and carbohydrates that people become predisposed to utilization of that fuel source. Above lipids, use fat, use intensities that are very low. So some of our data with the fighters shows that as well. But I think the challenge for us is that we're working with a clientele that require high intensity bouts of effort. So fueling appropriately is very important for that.

Duncan French: Now, we use tactics here where we essentially have athletes on what you would say kind of is largely a ketogenic diet. But then we will fuel carbohydrates around training sessions. So we'll do very timed exposure to carbohydrates. So it's not post training, post training, immediately pre during, and then immediately post. And then the rest of their diets breakfast, lunch, and dinner are what would look like ketogenic type approaches. So we're trying to be very tactical in the exposure to maximize the intensity for the training and then return to a metabolically efficient diet, which is heavily reduced in carbohydrate because we've fueled the sessions that need it.

Andrew Huberman: I'm smiling because once again, this place, the UFC Performance Center, is doing things scientifically, which to me, the idea and I'm pleased to hear that, because to me, this idea that the ketogenic diet is the best and only diet or carbohydrates and low protein diets are the best diet, it's ludicrous. Then you mentioned metabolic efficiency.
Andrew Huberman: As a sort of a final question, what are some things about the UFC or something about the UFC that perhaps people don't know in terms of its overall mission or what you guys are trying to do here? I mean, I think I've become a fan of MMA, and I am more and more as time moves on. Some people might be into MMA, some people not into watching MMA. But what are some things that the UFC is interested in and doing that most people might not know about and certainly I might not know about?

Duncan French: Yeah, I think we try to be cutting edge. We try to be super progressive. We think we've got an amazing platform here, particularly at the Performance Institute, to do some really cool things that can inform many different people. And that doesn't just mean the 600 or so athletes that are on our global roster. What we're trying to do is influence global community around optimizing huberman performance. So any moment in time, we're engaging in different technologies, with different vendors, different partners, exploring opportunities to learn more, share data, understand what's the best mechanisms for interpreting your body, interpreting how your body is responding to training, interpreting your nutrition, or whatever it may be. We're in a really privileged position to do that, but we've also hence, you've been here today.

Duncan French: We're also trying to venture into some really cool areas of science and research that's got applicability that you can take from high performance athletes and apply to yourself to Joe Blow walking down the street out Thorne. That is really interesting. And that's everything from whether it's CBD and psychedelics through to different technologies for thermal monitoring and bluetooth heart rate monitoring or whatever it may be, through to data management, et cetera, and anything in between. We've got some great partners on the nutrition side, on the psychology side, on the data side, and I think we always try to just push the envelope a little bit more. I think we keep our core mission with our athletes, but I think a lot of what we do, hence your podcast and an amazing platform, you do such a great job of it that we can all learn and take from the elite and interpret how it might help us just in the general population. So I think that's our North Star is to provide our athletes the best integrated service of care, but we also want to influence just the global community and put USC at the forefront of that.

Andrew Huberman: That's great. Well, you guys are certainly doing it. We can't let the cat out of the bag just yet, but the things that we're gearing up to do with my laboratory and the work together, hopefully we'll be able to talk about that and share that in the year to come. But we're very excited about that. And Duncan, look, I have this filter that I use when I talk to people, academics or otherwise, which is some people, they open their mouth and it doesn't make much difference. But when you speak, I learn so much. I'm going to take the protocols that I've heard about today. I'm going to think about how I'm training and how I could train differently and better, how I'm eating, how I could eat differently and better for sake of performance and just in general. Thank you so much for your time, your scientific expertise. The stuff you're doing in the practical realm, it's immense. So hopefully we can do it again.

Duncan French: Yes. Thank you. This has been a blast. I appreciate it. And, yeah, keep doing what you're doing because I know there's a lot of people out there that love the platform. So thanks for the invite. It's been awesome.

Andrew Huberman: Thank you. Thanks so much.
Duncan French: Your body doesn't know the difference, right? Your body does not know the difference. It has a primordial kind of physiological response that it's created over millions and millions of years. And I think that physiology is not changing and it's fixed in a particular way right now that it doesn't understand the difference between whether it's six by ten doing a challenging workout over here, whether it's putting my hands on the hot coal, whether it's a lion stood in front of me or whatever. That epinephrine response from the level of the brain down to the whole signaling cascade is the same.

Andrew Huberman: And cold, I've heard, can actually prevent some of the beneficial effects of training that it can actually get in the way of muscle growth, et cetera.

Duncan French: Yeah, there's some pretty robust data out there now showing that it definitely has an influence on performance variables like strength and power in particular. But absolutely in terms of muscle hypertrophy and there's a big kind of theme in the world of athletic performance right now in terms of periodization of cold exposure as a recovery modality. When do you use cold? Should you be using cold for recovery in periods of high training load when you're actually pursuing maybe general proprietary work? We're actually trying to pursue muscle growth. Well, that's usually where you get the most sore. It's usually where you feel the most fatigued. But it's probably not the most beneficial approach to use an ice bath in that scenario because you're dampening, you're dulling the Mtor pathway and the hypertrophic signaling pathway.

Duncan French: Whereas in a competition phase where actually quality of exercise and quality of execution of skill and technical work has to be maintained, you want to throw the kitchen sink of recovery capabilities and recovery interventions in that scenario because the muscle building activity should be in the bank. That should have been done in the general preparatory work. And now you're focusing on technical execution. So you're absolutely right.

Andrew Huberman: That's interesting. So if I understand correctly, if I want to maximize muscle growth or power or improvements and adaptations, then the inflammation response, the delayed onset muscle soreness, all the stuff that's uncomfortable and that we hear is so terrible is actually the stimulus for adaptation. And so using cold in that situation might short circuit my progress. But if I'm I don't know that I'll ever do this, but if I were to do an Iron Man or something or run a marathon under those conditions, I'm basically coming to the race, so to speak, with all the power and strength I'm going to have. And so there reducing inflammation is good because it's going to allow me to perform more work, essentially.
Andrew Huberman: In particular, things like ice baths, cold showers, or any other type of cold temperature exposure. In theory, that's stress also, it's epinephrine. And so how should one think about the use of cold for recovery? So if it's stress, if cold causes stress, then how is cold used for recovery? That's what I don't understand. And maybe you just want to share your thoughts on that.

Duncan French: Yeah, no, and I think it's a great question, and I think the jury is still out there, certainly knowing some of the conversations that we've been having. But I think when we talk about stress, it's your classic fight, flight or freeze approach, and throwing your body into a cold tub, an ice bath, or whatever it may be, certainly is going to have a physiological stress response. Now, people are using that for different end goals. And again, I think that's where the narrative has to be explained. If you are using the stress specifically to manage the mindset, to use it as a specific stress stimulus, that's the same as me doing six by 1080 percent. You're just trying to find something to disrupt the system, to do something that's very if you want a better term, painful, discomfort, whatever. You're just finding a stressor and then being able to manage the mindset. But if you're using cold specifically from a physiological perspective to promote redistribution of vascularity of blood flow to different vascular areas of muscle that you feel have gone through a workout that are damaged or whatever it may be, I think we've got to understand what that stress mechanism is. And the data.

Duncan French: The literature is certainly still out there with respect to cryotherapy and cold baths and some of these cold exposure in terms of what they do at the level of the muscle tissue, if that's the target, if you're trying to promote a flushing mechanism or you're trying to promote redistribution of the blood flow. What you've got to understand is that cold is going to clamp down every part of the vascular system. And we've really got to understand how the muscle would be redistributed to areas of interest. So I think the stress response is a real thing with respect to cold exposure. But I think the narrative around what are you using the cold for? Has to precede the conversation because, yes, it's like putting your hand over a hot coal that's a stress. The same way as jumping in a cold bath is I think most people.

Andrew Huberman: Don'T realize that you're going to get the epinephrine release from holding your hand too close to flame and you're going to get it from getting in the ice bath.
Andrew Huberman: And of course, we should acknowledge again, there are a ton of variations that one could implement there, but that would be a good starting place on the opposite side. For somebody who's mainly interested in hypertrophy, what would be the rep cadence that if you had a gun to your head that you would prescribe?

Andy Galpin: I would probably do the exact same thing, but I would make the last number two. So three one two. You could also just keep three one on. It is still very fine. Even exploding on the concentric is still highly effective for training hypertrophy. So if you wanted to keep it super simple and just make rep cadence not a variable that you play with because you have other ones to move, that's great. If you want to add a little bit of time to the concentric phase, fine. It's not going to make enough of a difference for most people for you to really worry about. I guess that's sort of the point I really want to make. This is a classic example of we're deep into a method, right? If as long as you hit the concepts I talked about earlier, whether you want to do 311323 triphase, this is just a method choice. That doesn't mean they're irrelevant. There are subtle changes within them. It's just 80 20 rule, right. So 80% of the benefit is going to be from the concept. 20% is this small thing.

Andy Galpin: If you're super into this field or you actually want to work with a qualified certified coach or something, there's lots of reasons to play with this if you're just on your own here and running this thing. Three one one is fine. Three one two, totally fine. Anything like that you really just want to make sure that in the strength side of the equation, you're under control and you can add enough load to stimulate strength and not get hurt with an acute trauma. Right. On the hypertrophy side, you're just wanting to load enough to where you can hit volume because you got to put a lot on there. So if you want to go lighter, if you want to go slower, fine. If you go slower in your repetition so maybe even like a five second eccentric, a two second pause, a three second rise, that's great. You can actually then stimulate the same amount of hypertrophy. Andy either do it with less weight or do it with less repetitions. So it's a variable you can play with if you're like, hey, I don't have enough weights at my house, or I only have a kettlebell or a dumbbell.

Andy Galpin: How am I going to stimulate hypertrophy? Your only option is really doing more reps. Well, eventually that train runs pretty shallow. Okay, here's the thing you can play with maybe just add time under tension is what we're calling right. Just do slower repetitions, go longer ones and hold it. So it's a variable that we use to individualize programs rather than something that you should really be focused on as, like a core aspect that's going to be driving whether or not your program works. It's just a tool we can play with in the what if scenarios. I will use this stuff a lot when I'm traveling. You can do a tremendous workout in your hotel room just doing like, a ten second eccentric, a ten second hold, a ten centric concentric.

Andrew Huberman: Yeah, I've had some decent hotel room workouts. They're not my preference, but by simply doing things like ten second lowering handstand push up against the door, totally, obviously assisted for me. I can't do a free handstand push up. I just don't have the skill or the strength or both. You can do some sort of configured dips between the beds or chairs. Andy this kind of thing.

Andy Galpin: Rear fidelity split squats are great to do in hotels. Put your back foot up on a bed and get an amazing split squat workout done. Yeah. Glute, bridges lots of stuff you can do there. Yeah.

Andrew Huberman: And with a jump rope, if you've ever heard someone jumping in the morning. Yeah, it may or may not have been me. It could be any number of things, but I'm known to skip rope in hotel rooms.
Duncan French: The more you do that challenging workout, do you get the same psychological stimulus, do you get the same stress response? And the assumption is unlikely. You accommodate, you become accustomed to the stressor. Your body will therefore adapt. And that's the classic overload principle, right? You then need to take the stressor down a different route. But I think when you look at the athletes that we work with here, it's a fistfight. At the end of the day, there's nothing more stressful than that. But I think just the exposure to the rigors of training to understand the bad positions, the bad situations, to know that they can get out of certain situations, out of certain submission holds or whatever it may be. I think that really ties in with some of my PhD work in terms of what these guys do to approach what is a really challenging sporting arena in mixed martial arts.

Andrew Huberman: Yeah, it's definitely the extreme of what's possible in terms of asking, does stress favor or hinder performance? Because like you said, at the end of the day, it's someone trying to hurt you as much as they possibly can within the bounds of the rules, and you're trying to do the same. I find that your thesis work fascinating. Were you never to be at the UFC Performance Institute? Luckily, they made the right choice and brought you here, but were you never to come here? I was still fascinated by this, because over and over we hear that stress is bad. Stress is bad. Stress is bad. But everything I read from the scientific literature is that stress, and epinephrine in particular, is coupled to the testosterone response to performance and to adaptation, provided it doesn't go on too long. So unless I'm saying something that violates that, and that's your work. So it's really important and beautiful work, and I refer to it often. So I'm just glad that we could bolt that down, because I think people need to know this, that discomfort is beneficial.

Andrew Huberman: Now, there's another side to this that I want to ask about, which is the use of cold.
Andrew Huberman: When I think intensity, I think epinephrine adrenaline. And since you have a background in catecholamines and testosterone, last time I was here at the UFC Performance Institute, we had a brief conversation, and I want to make sure I got the details right, that in the short term and a big increase in stress hormone can lead to an increase in testosterone. Like a parachute jump. Correct. So stress can promote the release of testosterone. That was news to me. We always hear about stress suppressing testosterone, stress suppressing the immune system, all these terrible things. But in the short term, you're saying it can actually increase the release of testosterone. So I have that, right?

Duncan French: Correct.

Andrew Huberman: Okay. And so then the second question is, does my cognitive interpretation of the stressor make a difference? In other words, if I voluntarily jump out of a plane with a parachute, does it have a different effect on my testosterone than if you shove me out of the plane against my will? Presumably with a parachute? Right, too.

Duncan French: So this was what all my PhD work was looking at, was the exposure to a stressor and the pre arousal of how your body essentially prepares for that stressor and then how it manages it throughout the exposure to the stress. And it was actually motivated from parachute jumpers. There was an older study looking at parachute jumpers into combat, and they were studying the cortisol, the stress response and the epinephrine response of these parachute jumpers. So we got us thinking about, hold on, there's certain workouts that you do that are just the daunting. It's like, okay, it's squat Saturday, or whatever it may be. Oh my gosh, this is going to be going to destroy me.

Andrew Huberman: Or I have to talk to this person I don't want to talk to, or PhD dissertation exam or something, even.

Duncan French: Public speaking or whatever it may be. Now, we used a resistance training protocol that these athletes knew was going to be very challenging. There's going to have some anxiety to doing it. They knew there were going to be some physical distress from doing it, and therefore their mindset of how they were going to approach that was already set. So what we saw prior, 15 minutes prior to the start of an exposure to the workout, that the epinephrine, the neuroadrenaline the adrenaline was already starting to prepare the body sympathetically to go into what it knew was going to be a very, very challenging workout. So that brings you back to exercise preparation, competition for certain preparation, preparation for certain competition. Excuse me. Pre workout routines, the use of music, all these different things that we know can now anecdotally in the gym we put into place. But the data that I presented showed that it was the first of its kind to show that this link between epinephrine and norepinephrine release and arousal and then consequent performance. So force output throughout the workout was intimately linked.
Andrew Huberman: What's unique about MMA fighters besides that they have this huge variety of tactical skills that they have to learn and perfect?

Duncan French: Yeah, that's a great question. I would say two things. I'm going to answer two questions. One, actually reiterates what you've already said. The degrees of freedom in mixedmartial arts arts are exponential like no other sport. We've got eleven different weight classes. We have men's classes, we have women's classes, we have kickboxers wrestlers, jujitsu fighters, judokers like karate fighters. The stylistic backgrounds are infinite. We're a weight classification sport. There's a whole issue relating to making weight and then rebounding to fight about 24 to 30 hours. The variability in this sport, the considerations that you have to make, are unprecedented compared to any other sport that I've worked with, and a lot of them go against and are the antithesis of what you would expect for high performance in terms of we don't always have a very clearly defined competition schedule. Once these guys fight, they don't necessarily know when their next fight is going to be.

Andrew Huberman: What's the closest spacing of a fight?

Duncan French: I mean, listen, I think the the record is around it's. It's just over a month, I believe. So, you know, that that's a quick turnaround, but most of these guys are fighting three or four times a year. Three times a year is pretty normal. The bigger fights maybe two times a year, but invariably the guys don't know when that next date is going to be. So we're in this gray area of, okay, what do we do? Are we taking some time off? Are we just going to do some general prep work? Are we going to try and keep the knife sharpened in case I get.

Andrew Huberman: I didn't realize this in that way. It's a lot like special operations.

Duncan French: Absolutely. You don't know when the call right.

Andrew Huberman: They have to be ready at all times. There isn't this like, let's get ready for the season, right?

Duncan French: Yeah. When I was with the British Olympic Association, I knew it was the British open, the Spanish open, the French open, the European Championships, the Israeli open, the American open, the Canadian Open, the Olympic Games.
Andrew Huberman: The premium channel is a response to the many questions we get about specific topics, and it will allow me to really drill deep into specific answers related to those topics. So once a month, I'm going to host and ask me anything, so-called AMA, where you can ask me anything about specific topics covered on the Huberman Lab podcast and I will answer those questions. Those of course will be recorded. They will also be other premium content available to premium subscribers such as transcripts and short videos of new tools and unique tools for mental health, physical health and performance. If you want to check out the premium channel, you can go to hubermanlab.com/premium. There is a $10 a month charge or $100 per year, and I should mention that a large portion of the proceeds from the Huberman Lab Premium Channel will go to support scientific research that develops the very sorts of tools that we talk about on the Huberman Lab podcast.

Andrew Huberman: The rest of the support for the Huberman Lab Podcast premium channel will go to supporting the regular Huberman Lab podcast. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium.
Andrew Huberman: Speaking of grip and nervous system and fitness and longevity, Dr. Peter Attia, who is a medical doctor, was a guest on the Huberman Lab podcast and provided an enormous wealth of information on that podcast episode. I really encourage you to check it out when you have time. And of course has his own spectacular podcast, The Drive with Peter Attia. Peter, Dr. Attia, I should say, often talks about certain movements or exercises that you should perform not just to improve your fitness, but also to touch into or measure how fit you are and how well you are progressing toward a long lifespan and healthspan. And one of those includes the ability to hang from a bar for a minute or longer. And there are a number of different expectations that one can have of how long they should be able to hang from a bar depending on their age and their fitness level, et cetera. Please check out Dr. Attia's podcast and his various social media sites to get more information on that. But what I can tell you is that if you're going to hang from a bar and you want to hang from that bar as long as possible, which turns out to be a interesting and important metric of your health, then gripping the bar very tightly will actually help.
Andrew Huberman: Peter, thanks for joining me today.

Peter Attia: Thanks for having me, man.

Andrew Huberman: I've been looking forward to this for a very long time. I'm a huge fan of your podcast. I know that you went to Stanford and worked with a number of people that are colleagues of mine. So for me, this is already a thrill just to be doing this.

Peter Attia: Yeah, likewise.

Andrew Huberman: I have a ton of questions, but I want to start off with something that I wonder a lot about and that I know many other people wonder about, which is how to assess their current healthspan and their trajectory in terms of health and well being, specifically as it relates to blood work. So what are your thoughts on blood work? Is it necessary for the typical person? So this is somebody who's not dealing with some acute syndrome or illness. And at what age would you suggest people start getting blood work? How frequently should they get blood work? How often do you get blood work done, et cetera.

Peter Attia: Yeah, there's a lot there. I mean, the way I talk about this with patients is first taking everything back to the objective. So what's the thing we're trying to optimize? So if a person says, look, I'm trying to break 10 hours for an Iron Man, I don't know that blood work is going to be a game changing aspect of their trajectory and their training. They're going to benefit much more from sort of functional analyses of performance. So I'm assuming, based on the question, that you're really coming at this through the lens of living longer and living better through the lifespan, health span, most lens, yeah.

Andrew Huberman: And just I think most people have some sense of their vitality or lack of vitality, but I think everyone wonders whether or not they could feel better and whether or not blood work will give them a window into how they might go about feeling better.

Peter Attia: Yeah, I think it does to some extent, but I also think that it has a lot of blind spots. So I kind of break things down into the two vectors that make up longevity, which are lifespan and health span. So lifespan is the easiest of those vectors to understand because it's pretty binary. You're alive or you're not alive. You're respiring or you're not. You make ATP or you don't. End of story. So what gets in the way of lifespan is essentially the four horsemen of disease, right? So atherosclerotic disease, cancer, neurodegenerative disease, and metabolic disease, which directly isn't the cause of many deaths, but basically creates the foundation to all of those other diseases. So if you're a non smoker, what I just rattled off is about 80% of your death. So how does blood work help address those? It varies. So on the atherosclerotic standpoint, it's a very good predictor of risk if you know what to look for. So primarily, ApoB would be the single most important lipoprotein that we care about.

Peter Attia: I can explain what that means in a second. And then also other markers of inflammation, endothelial health and metabolic health. When it comes to cancer, blood testing in the sense of biomarkers is not particularly helpful outside of knowing that the second leading environmental or modifiable cause of cancer is metabolic ill health after smoking. So we don't actually know a lot about cancer in the sense of what causes it. It's really stochastic and it's a lot of bad luck. So we know that smoking drives it, and we know that even though epidemiologically we say obesity drives it, what it really means is metabolic poor health. It's probably the hyperinsulinemia that comes with obesity that drives it. So biomarkers help with that, but there's still an enormous blind spot to cancer. We could talk about liquid biopsies aside because those aren't really biomarkers studies, but put that away.

Peter Attia: On the neurodegenerative side, I don't think we have a lot of insight that comes to understanding Parkinson's disease. But when it comes to dementia, particularly Alzheimer's disease, which is the most prevalent form of dementia, I think the biomarkers can be quite helpful. They overlap a lot with the atherosclerotic diseases. So the same things that drive the risk of heart disease are driving the risk of dementia. And then there's some novel stuff as well. If you include genetic testing, which you can get out of a blood test, we get a whole suite of genes, not just APOE, but far more nuanced stuff than that that can also play a role. So you can stratify risk in that sense. So in aggregate, I would say blood testing with biomarkers provides pretty good insight into lifespan.
Andrew Huberman: You talked about intent within the movement. What about specific cadences for repetitions? I was taught that one should lower the weight slowly, the so called eccentric portion of the movement, and then to try and explode the weight through the concentric phase and then also make sure that one is using full range of motion and perfect form, as it were. Now of course, that is one tiny slice of the possible rep cadences and ways to approach resistance training, although I think it's a pretty good one. What are the general parameter sets that one needs to consider? You could imagine lifting 4 seconds concentric, pause for one, pause for two, eccentric. I realize there's an infinite number of variations here, but is there a way to use rep cadence, repetition, cadence that is, as a way to work through weak points and to be strong in every position of the movement?

Andy Galpin: Yeah, a lovely question. I think the way I would like to answer this is maybe going back just a touch to get directly to that. So I think if we walk through power, strength, and hypertrophy, andy, I hit you with the concepts that are specific to each one that's going to lay out your answer. Because the most true answer there is, it depends on the goal. The answer for what is optimal for strength is diametrically opposed. For potentially what's optimized for hypertrophy. The same exact thing can be said for momentum. So we've classically heard things like this don't bounce at the bottom, you're cheating. So if you're doing a lap pull down or something, you don't bounce and rebound, you stop at the bottom, slow down. All these things are thought to be truisms of strength conditioning. But guess what? Those are all truisms, assuming we're trying to grow muscle. Andy that actually goes back to our conversation in episode one about a lot of the things we think are just fundamental truths about strength training are just fundamental truths that came from the bodybuilding world. And they're not wrong.

Andy Galpin: They're good ideas. But there are other adaptations one needs to get from strength training that are not just maximizing muscle growth. So what I will lay out to you is a case for which you should balance, a case for when you should go fast, a case for when you should be under control. All of these things are different variables we can modify and get different adaptations for it.
Andrew Huberman: Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Roka. Roka makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of the absolute highest quality. I've spent my career working on the visual system, and I can tell you that everything about the way that roca eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed was with performance in mind. First of all, they're extremely lightweight, so you actually forget that you're wearing them most of the time. Second of all, even if you get sweaty, if you're running or biking or it's a hot day, or running around just happen to be perspiring quite a lot. They don't slip off your face, which is terrific.

Andrew Huberman: They also have a great aesthetic, and they have a lot of different styles to choose from. The clarity of the lenses is superb. I don't think there's a match for the clarity of Roka glasses out there, and if there is, I'm not aware of it. They are absolutely crystal clear, and that's true in any environment. Whether or not you're working in a dim environment or a bright environment, the clarity is unmatched. If you'd like to try Roca eyeglasses or sunglasses, you can go to roca.com that's roka.com and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order. Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are uniquely tailored to your sleep needs. All of us have unique sleep needs, and we should be sleeping on a mattress that's ideal for us.

Andrew Huberman: If you go to the Helix site, they have a quick two minute quiz, asks you a number of questions about whether or not you sleep on your side, your back, your stomach, do you tend to run hot or cold, et cetera? Maybe you don't have the answers to those questions, which is fine. They'll match you to the mattress that's ideal for your sleep needs. I took that quiz, and about ten months ago, I started sleeping on the Dusk Helix mattress. That's Dusk. That's the mattress that's ideal for me, and I'm sleeping better than I ever have before. So if you're interested in upgrading your mattress, go to Helix Sleep Huberman, take their two minute sleep quiz, and they'll match you to a customized mattress, and you'll get up to $200 off all mattress orders and two free pillows. That's helix sleep, Huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Headspace. Headspace is a meditation app that's backed by 25 published studies.

Andrew Huberman: By now, I think most people have heard about or experienced the benefits of meditation improve focus, better sleep, reduce stress, more creativity and insight. There's just so many studies out there that support those claims. The challenge, however, is sticking to a meditation practice, and over the years, I confess there have been times when I've meditated regularly, and then I stop meditating, even though it always provides benefits for me the first time I do it. And every time I do it. With the Headspace app, it makes it very easy to meditate consistently because they have different types of meditations to select from, and they come in different durations. So sometimes I only have three or four minutes to meditate. They have those sorts of meditations. They also have longer meditations of 20 minutes or more. If you want to try Headspace, you can go to Headspace.com Specialoffer. And if you do that, you'll get a free one month trial with Headspace's full library of meditations that you can use in any situation.

Andrew Huberman: This is the best deal offered by Headspace right now. So, again, if you're interested, go to Headspace.com Specialoffer. And now my conversation with Dr.
Andrew Huberman: So what was the takeaway there? Is it beneficial for people to get a little stressed about the upcoming impending event, whether or not it's a lift in the gym or whether or not it's talking to somebody that you might be intimidated to talk to or an exam? Is the stress good for performance, or is it harmful?

Duncan French: Yeah, and I think that's a great question. And I think I can only talk to physical exertion, which is what we were exploring. I don't want to tread on the toes of the psychologists with flow state and these types of things, because clearly.

Andrew Huberman: I think you're in the position of scientific strength on this one. I think you have the leverage. I have a lot of friends in that community, as I'll just say, as a buffer to the answer you're about to give, that there's very little science around flow and there's very little neuroscience related to most psychological states anyway. So I think we've got a lot of degrees of freedom here.

Duncan French: All right. I can breathe easy. Thank you for that.

Andrew Huberman: Anything you like, credit Duncan, anything you dislike, send the mean comments to me.

Duncan French: Yeah, I think from my data, certainly the the greater arousal, the higher the performance was from a, from a physical exertion perspective. And I think that was the intriguing part of some of my findings, where there's definitely an individual biokinetics to some of these hormonal kind of releases in as much as those guys that had the highest adrenaline response in terms of epinephrine release. Norepinephrine release also sustained force output for a longer period of the workout than those that didn't. So the individuals that had a lower stimulus of the sympathetic arousal, let's say, certainly didn't perform as well throughout the workout. Now, the intriguing thing then becomes is, okay, and I think this really segues into what we're doing here with combat athletes, with mixedmartial arts artists. There's a philosophy, there's a paradigm now from herself in terms of the exposure, repeat exposure.
Andrew Huberman: Love that advice. Is it a systemic effect or a local effect? So, for instance, let's say that, well, my mother is in her late 70s. She actually used to be really strong. When we were a kid, she could move this fish tank that was in my room long before I could move it. And she's really strong. Over the years, I wouldn't call her frail by any means, but I certainly think she could benefit from some strength training. Let's say she were to start doing some leg presses or start even with air squats and maybe work up to some push ups. Are the effects all local? Meaning if she were to just train her legs or just do push ups, would it only be the loads applied to the limbs and muscles and tissues?

Peter Attia: I think that's where the bulk of it is, yeah.

Andrew Huberman: Okay, so you need to train the whole body, essentially, yeah.

Peter Attia: Now, keep in mind, the diagnosis of osteopenia and osteoporosis is based on only three locations the left hip, the right hip, and the lumbar spine. So that's just the convention by which we make the diagnosis. And I think part of that has to do with that's where the majority of the insults occur. Now, not all of the insults I've seen people that have because of horrible bone density, they're fracturing ankles and tibia fibula, like they're having low tib fib fractures just walking. So clearly, bone density outside of those regions does matter, but much of it is really focused on and by the way, you fall, you break a wrist. So this is a systemic issue, but the majority of the response is a local response because it really comes down to putting a load directly on that bone and then having that bone in kind respond by laying down more bone.
Andrew Huberman: So anything corticosterone like, interesting. And then I always get asked this question, and I always reflexively want to say no, but I don't really know the answer, so I don't reply. What about topical corticosterone? People will put cortisone cream. To me, it seems almost inconceivable that would have a systemic effect. But then again, what do I know?

Peter Attia: It's all dose and time related. So if you're talking about like, I've got a little rash under my skin, I'm going to put corticosteroids on, probably not, but certainly with enough of it put on, I mean, it is absorbed, so it could be an issue. But that's not typically what we're concerned with. I mean, we're mostly concerned with people that are taking even modest amounts of prednisone for months, years at a time, or like I said, kids that are using steroid inhalers for years and years and years. Again, I'm not suggesting that if your kids on a steroid inhaler, they shouldn't be. You have to solve the most important problem. And if asthma is the most important problem, so be it. I think you just want to turn that into, okay, well, how much more imperative is it that our kid is doing things that are putting a high amount of stress on their bones and via their muscles to make sure that they're in that maximal capacity to build?

Andrew Huberman: Do you think that somebody in their 30s or 40s or 50s could still benefit from strength training in terms of bone mineral density and longevity as it relates to bone mineral density, given that there's this key window earlier, they might have missed that.

Peter Attia: Oh, yeah, no, this is essential for the rest of life because you're now trying to prevent the fall off. So basically the way it works is from birth to, say, 20, you're in growth. From 20 to 50, you plateau. At 50, men start to decline, but it's really small. Women start to decline and it's precipitous.

Andrew Huberman: And it's related to the drop in estrogen associated with menopause or pre menopause. Correct. And can we get into any of the broad contours of what that strength training looks like? We had Dr. Andy Galpin on the show. He talked a lot about. Ways to build strength versus hypertrophy versus endurance, et cetera. I think there's pretty good agreement across the fields of physiotherapy, et cetera, physiology and medicine in terms of how to do that, but my understanding is fairly low repetition ranges, so this is anywhere from one to six repetitions. Typically. Not aiming for a pump, hypertrophy, that sort of thing, but heavy loads that are hard to move. 80% of one repetition maximum or more, done with long rest periods, two to three times a week type thing. Is that about right?
Andrew Huberman: What are some things that we can do to improve bone mineral density at any age?

Peter Attia: So it turns out there's a real critical window in which we are malleable. So depending on the age at which someone's listening to us discuss this, if you're under 2025, you are still in that time of your life when you are able to reach your potential. So it turns out that strength training is probably the single best thing you can do. And this was a surprise to me because we did an AMA on this topic a little while ago, and that's when I got really deep on this with our analysts. My assumption was, oh, running must be the best. Like some sort of impact must be the best thing you can do. I assumed running would be better than swimming and cycling, but it turned out that power lifting was probably the best thing you could do. And I think once you understand how bones work, it became more clear, which is powerlifting is really putting more of a shear force from the muscle via the tendon onto the bone. And that's what the bones are really sensing.

Peter Attia: They're sensing that shear force that's being applied through the bone in a compressive way, depending on the bone, of course. And that's what's basically activating the osteoblasts, which are the cells that are allowing bone to be built. So this turns out to be probably more important for females because how high you can get during that period of development, say, till you're 20 or 25, basically sets your trajectory for the rest of your life. So where we get into real trouble is with patients who for example, used large amounts of inhaled steroids during that period of their life because, let's say they had really bad asthma or patients who needed large amounts of corticosteroids for some other immune related condition. So during their critical window of development, they were taking a drug that was impairing this process. So we have some patients like that in our practice, and that's just an enormous liability that we're working really hard to overcome with nutrition, with hormones, with drugs, with training. And it's just something you have to be aware of.

Andrew Huberman: I wasn't aware that inhalers for asthma and things of that sort can impair bone mineral density.

Peter Attia: Yes, they're steroid based. Some of them, of course, are just beta agonists, and they're fine.
Peter Attia: When you get into health span, you have kind of the cognitive, physical, emotional domains. I think here the biomarkers are far less helpful and here we kind of rely more on functional testing. So when it comes to sort of the cognitive piece, you can do cognitive testing in terms of long term risk. A lot of the things that imply good cognitive health as you age are in line with the same things that you would do to reduce the risk of dementia. So all the biomarkers that you would look to improve through dementia risk reduction, you would be improving through cognitive health on the physical side, outside of looking at hormone levels and things, which we look at extensively, and understanding how those might aid in or prevent some of the metrics that matter really is this is a biomarkers aside thing.

Peter Attia: I mean, I'd be much more interested in a person's dexa, CPET testing, Vo two, max testing, zone two, lactate testing, fat oxidation, those what I would consider more functional tests that give me far more insight into that. And then of course, the emotional piece, which depending on who you are, might be the single most important piece, without which none of this other stuff matters, right? If you're a totally miserable human being, your relationships suck. I don't think any of this other stuff matters, and certainly there's nothing that I'm looking at in biomarkers that's giving me great insight into that.

Andrew Huberman: Do you ask about emotional state, or do you try and assess emotional state indirectly when you do an intake with one of your patients?

Peter Attia: Probably not so much in the intake because I think it takes a while to form a relationship with a patient before that starts to become something that they're necessarily going to want to talk with you about. But I definitely think of it as an important part of what we do, and I think without it, none of this other stuff really matters. Again, the irony of thinking about how many years I spent sort of in pursuit of fully optimizing every detail of everything without any attention being paid to that dimension is not lost on me. And look, there are some patients who that's something that's compartmentalized. Maybe they're doing well in that department or maybe they aren't, but they just aren't willing to engage on that yet.
Andrew Huberman: Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Thesis. Thesis makes custom nootropics that are designed for your unique needs. To be honest, I'm not a fan of the word nootropics because nootropics means smart drugs. And to be honest, there is no such thing as a smart drug because there's no neural circuit for being smart. There are neural circuits rather for being creative, or for task switching, or for focus. As we all know, different sorts of demands, whether or not they are cognitive or physical, require different types of cognitive and physical abilities. Thesis understands this and has created a kit of custom nootropics that are tailored to your needs.

Andrew Huberman: To get your own personalized nootropic starter kit, you can go to Takethes.com Huberman, take their three minute quiz, and Thesis will send you four different formulas to try in your first month that's takethesis.com Huberman and use the code Huberman at checkout to get 10% off your first. Box of custom Nootropics. Today's episode is also brought to us by Inside Tracker. Inside Tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your. Body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long term health can only be assessed from a quality blood test. And nowadays, with the advent of modern DNA tests, you can also analyze, for instance, what your biological age is and compare it to your chronological age. And obviously it's your biological age that really matters.

Andrew Huberman: The challenge with a lot of blood tests and DNA tests, however, is that you get information back about metabolic factors, hormones and so forth, but you don't. Know what to do with that information. Inside Tracker makes it very easy to know what to do with that information. To optimize your health, they have a personalized platform. It's a dashboard that you go to. You can click on the level of any hormone, metabolic factor, lipid, et cetera, and it will tell you the various sorts of interventions based on nutrition, supplementation, et cetera, that you can use to bring those numbers into the range that are ideal for you. If you'd like to try Inside Tracker, you can visit Insidetracker.com Huberman to get 20% off. Any of inside tracker's plans that's insidetracker.com huberman to get 20% off. Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are of the absolute highest quality.

Andrew Huberman: They also have some really unique features because they are customized to your unique sleep needs. I've talked over and over again on this podcast and on other podcasts about the fact that sleep is the foundation of mental health, physical health, and performance. There's just simply no other substitute for a quality night's sleep on a regular basis. I've been sleeping on a Helix mattress for well over a year now, and it's the best sleep that I've, Peter, had, and that's in large part because the mattress was designed for me. What you need to know, however, is what's the deal? Mattress for you? And you can do that by going to Helix site. You can take their brief quiz, which will ask you, do you sleep on your side? You're back your stomach? Or maybe you don't know, or maybe all three. Do you tend to run hot or cold in the night? Maybe you know, maybe you don't. At the end of that short quiz, they will match you to the ideal mattress for you. I match to the dusk, the dusk mattress. But again, that's what I need.

Andrew Huberman: That's not necessarily what you need in order to get your best night's sleep. But if you're interested in upgrading your mattress, go to Helixleep.com Huberman, take their two minute sleep quiz, and they'll match you to a customized mattress for you. And you'll get up to $200 off any mattress order and two free pillows. They have terrific pillows, and you get to try out that mattress for 100 nights, risk free. They'll even pick it up for you if you don't love it, but I'm certain you will. Again, if you're interested in you go to Helixleep.com Huberman for up to $200 off your mattress order and two free pillows. And now for my discussion with Dr. Peter Attia.
Andrew Huberman: So you're trying to visualize your torso as more or less a cylinder and you're trying to fill it with air. The logic being that if I were to push down onto a full, unopened can of soda water for all you sugar folks out there, soda water, and then push as hard as I could, it's going to be hard for me to crush that can. But if the can were empty or if it were a little bit kinked in the middle correct. Then I could likely crush that can.

Andy Galpin: Yeah. What you're really doing is you have your spinal erectors in the back, right? And then a whole series of abdominal exercise science. You actually have some neural control, systematic control of contracting those, but you don't have muscles on the inside that you can do. So you're basically bringing in air and saying, I'll use air to push from the inside out, and I'll use muscles to push from the outside in to create this brace, and I don't want over compression with the muscles. If you see people that have just enormous spinal erectors, sometimes that's an indicator of actually a poor breathing or bracing strategy, because they're using spinal erectors to creatine all their compression and not actually using the insider. That's not always the case, but sort of like a thing to think about. So over compression through the spinal erectors is not necessarily ideal. The best scenario is a little bit of a brace of both. So we use some air to push this side, we use some musculature to press that way, and then that spine is just nicely held in position again, not in a position where I've locked down my diaphragm and I can't get any air out.

Andy Galpin: I should be able to get that braced pattern. Andy then be able to speak. In fact, I'm doing it right now. And you'll see like a little bit of a you if you're really paying attention to my voice, you can hear a little bit of a subtle difference. But I should be able to do this for quite a long time. I could take a maximum rep right here in this position. Whether I'm overhead pressing, doing some sort of row like anything andy feel fairy braced in the entire quadrant.
Andrew Huberman: On the topic of skill development, regardless of sport, we hear all the time, and it certainly is intuitive to me that the person who can focus the best will progress the fastest. But it's kind of interesting. Sometimes I talk to athletes and they seem a little bit laid back about their training sometime, and yet they obviously know how to flip the switch and they can really dial in the intensity. Do you think that there are optimal protocols for skill learning in terms of physical skill learning? Could it ever be parameterized like the six sets of ten reps? And this gets to the heart of Neuroplasticity, which is still not a black box, but it's kind of a black box with portions of it illuminated, I like to say. But what are your thoughts on skill development for somebody that wants to get better at sport? Do you recommend a particularly long or short training session? Does intensity matter or is it just reps?

Duncan French: Yeah, I think no, it's not a volume driven exercise. It's a quality driven exercise. And listen, my expertise is not in motor learning and motor skill acquisition. I tend to default to Dr. Gabriel Wolf here at UNLV for that. She's one of the leading proponents in this area. But if you look at true skill development, it is about rehearsal of accurate movement, accurate movement mechanics. And as soon as that becomes impacted by fatigue or inaccurate movement, you're now losing the motor learning, you're losing the accuracy of the skill that people can call it muscle memory or whatever they want, right? But essentially you're grooving neural axons to create movement patterns and they're situational throughout sport, right? Whether it's a croif turn in soccer or a jump shot in basketball or a forehand down the line, you can carve out that particular posture and position and skill and you can isolate it and you can drill it again and again again.

Duncan French: Now, as soon as fatigue is influencing that repetition, it's time to stop. And the best coaches understand that. They understand that it's quality over quantity when it comes to skill acquisition. So to answer your question in a roundabout way, I would say yes, it's shorter sessions that are very high quality. And I think the best athletes in my experience are the ones that consciously and cognitively are aware of it at every moment of the training session. They should leave the training session not necessarily just physically fatigued, but mentally fatigued because they're completely engaged in the learning process. The problem then becomes, okay, if we just do lots of 30 minutes sessions, we've got to do a lot of 30 minutes sessions to get the volume exposure of the repetition and the rehearsal of this skill again and again and again. So it's a bit of a paradox, it's a bit of a double edged sword, but a three hour session versus a 90 minutes session.

Duncan French: We'll take the 90 minutes session any day when it comes to skill acquisition because that's going to be driven by quality over quantity.
Andrew Huberman: Duncan French. Duncan French, great to see you again.

Duncan French: Likewise. Thank you. I don't often have many Stanford professors in the Performance Institute, so I'm really excited.

Andrew Huberman: Well, this place is amazing, and you have a huge role in making it what it is. The reason I'm so excited to talk with you is that you're one of these rare beasts that you have been involved in human performance and athletic performance at the collegiate level. You are obviously very involved in MMA now in the UFC Performance Institute, and you also had the fortunate experience, I like to think, of doing a PhD in. What exactly was the PhD in?

Duncan French: It was exercise physiology.

Andrew Huberman: Exercise physiology. So you're familiar also with designing studies, control groups, all the sorts of things that, in my opinion anyway, are kind of lacking from the internet social media version of exercise science, which is that people throw out all sorts of ideas about how people should be training, what they should be doing and eating and not eating and doing. And certainly science doesn't have all the answers, but I just think it's so rare to find somebody that's at the convergence of all those different fields. And so I have a lot of questions for you today that I'm sure the audience are going to be really interested in.

Duncan French: Well, listen, I mean, I appreciate that. It's very humbling, and, yeah, I've worked hard to get to where I am, but I've always tried to be authentic. And I think authenticity comes alongside academic rigor and objectivity and insight and knowledge base. Right. At the end of the day, it's about having confidence, having expertise, and being able to deliver that expertise in my world to athletes. And I think that's what I've always tried to do. I've tried to have many strings to my bow so that I can talk with many different hats on. One day I'm talking to a coach, the next day, I'm talking to an athlete, the next day, I'm talking to a CEO. The next day, I'm talking to an academic professor. So I think being able to wear those different hats is certainly a skill set that I've tried to build throughout my career. And like I said, I've been blessed to work with I think it was 36 different professional Olympic sports last time I've accounted. So, yeah, it's been a wild ride. It's been great.

Andrew Huberman: Which of those sports was the most unusual?

Duncan French: I've worked with Crown Green Bowling, which I don't know, as an American guy, I don't know.

Andrew Huberman: I've never heard of it.
Andy Galpin: That when we get that the rest of the hidden, invisible stressors taken care of, their training volume goes up so much because they'll just start coming back. And then it's like, oh my God, I'm not sore anymore. Oh my God, I'm not nearly as sore. I did this exact workout countless times before and now I'm doing it and I'm not sore at all anymore. What the hell? We didn't do anything different with the programming or really the nutrition, but we got the rest of that allostatic load under control and boom, things take off.

Andrew Huberman: It's a lot like drivers. So many people seem to be riding the brake and so many people seem to be heavy on the accelerator.

Andy Galpin: Yeah, that's actually one of the ways we describe it. It's like you want to go faster people's inclination. Step one is to hit the gas. Our step number one is making sure your left foot is not on the brake. You'll go faster with less resistance, which means you'll actually wear down the system a lot slower by just taking your foot off the brake first. If you're then not going fast enough, now we can push the accelerator, but I'm not pushing that accelerator. While your foot's still on the brake. You're going to go a little bit faster, but not as fast as you should be going. With that much work, Andy, you're going to start wearing down brake pedals and things like that.

Andrew Huberman: I like that analogy. It so hitting that ten to 20 sets per week repetition range is pretty broad provided you get close to failure. Hit failure every once in a while could be the final set of each exercise. Or maybe do one workout where you hit failure on everything, but then you don't do it for a few more. Again, it sounds like there's a lot of play in the system here. Rest ranges anywhere from 30 seconds all the way up to three or four minutes, depending on how heavy you're training and how close to failure or to failure. Maybe even quote unquote, beyond failure, if there is such a thing. You're training throwing in negatives and things like that. We didn't get into really high intensity techniques, but people again vary in the extent to which they're pushing the system. But there does seem to be some value to mixing up the rest between set ranges, across exercises and across workouts. But you could combine them all in the same workout is what I heard. And then in terms of progression, it sounds to me like the goal in hypertrophy training is not necessarily to add more weight to the bar, although that's one way one could do it. But that the progression actually can arrive through this really extensive kit of changing the speed of movement, changing the number of sets, adding some volume, maybe changing the split so that you go from a three day a week full body workout to more of a body parts, one or two body parts per day, every other day or two on one off any number of different variations that are out there. Sounds like all of these can and will work, provided that people are obeying the general principles of this hypertrophy adaptation inducing protocol that you described and that they are meeting the necessary but not sufficient variables as well, such as sleep, nutrition and managing the stress in the rest of their life.

Andrew Huberman: Do I have that correctly?

Andy Galpin: Yeah, that's really good. One more thing I'd like to add is this is a situation for hypertrophy in which there are some exercises that I actually don't think are good ideas. So I want to make sure we included those in the conversation. That's not necessarily the case for strength, you can really do kind of whatever one you want, and that is specifically plyometrics. Although in fact, if you look at there's, a recent review paper came out showing that plyometrics are effective as well.

Andrew Huberman: One can do almost anything as long as it falls within this parameter set.

Andy Galpin: The concepts are few and the methods are many and the methods for hypertrophy are many, many. In general, though, plyometrics are not my first, 2nd or even like hundredth choice for hypertrophy. If they're a part of a total training program, andy, you get some hypertrophy as a result. Cool. You're lucky. Not the first place I'm going. The other major category are weightlifting variations. So that when I'm saying weightlifting, I mean specifically Olympic weightlifting, as in snatch, clean and jerk. And their variations, those are just not a good exercise choice. It's not that they don't work, it's just the risk to benefit ratio starts to fall pretty fast in the negative favor and so it's just not worth doing sets of ten of a snatch unless you're in a sport where that's like the competition or whatever. But if the goal is simply hypertrophy, choose different exercises than that.

Andrew Huberman: Great.
Andy Galpin: Of course. Yes. Okay, great. So ton of work came out of Don Layman's life was actually Lane's mentor, as well as Stu Phillips at McMaster. So a ton of work there. And we can answer a number of things here. So Lane's numbers that he recommended, also known as about a gram of protein per pound of body weight, it's a great start. Now, once you slide below that's per pound, right. 1 gram/lb, right.

Andrew Huberman: Andy earlier, which is also making sure because we're changing units here, it was 1.6 grams/kg of body weight all the way up to I think it was 2.4, but maybe as high as 2.7 grams of protein per kilogram of body weight.

Andy Galpin: So 2.2 in that unit would be the same thing. So 2.2 grams/kg is the same as 1 gram/lb, right? So depending on which or you're listening to this at, one of those may be easier than the other for you if you start getting below that number. Now, you do start running into questions of protein quality, protein type and protein timing. This is one of the reasons why I actually fully agree with Lane, is just get that number higher than you think and then all those other variables don't matter. If that number is low, then you need to start paying attention to a bunch of other stuff you've added. Now, complexity to your program, things you got to pay attention to. Just stay high and it doesn't matter. And so you can just leave a lot of those things off the table. That seems to be fairly clear in the work of some of these gentlemen I just mentioned that as long as you get to that total number, the question about timing and types and quality, it seems to matter a lot less.

Andy Galpin: In fact, Sue's recent work in non animal based proteins really showed that to be fairly clear, that those are quite effective. Assuming total protein intake is high enough, the amount of leucine and other amino acids in those actual proteins matter less if the total threshold is just super high. So just do that and you're fine. Now, the other caveat we have to say here is timing of macronutrients seems to be somewhat irrelevant for protein, but that is not the case for carbohydrates. So that timing does matter. Replenishment of muscle glycogen is very specific and you want to make sure that that is around a lot if you're doing either maintaining training quality or you're sliding into endurance type of work. And so nutrient timing does matter with carbohydrates. Maybe less so with protein and certainly less so with protein if the total protein ingestion is high enough. So it depends on what we're going after in terms of a training goal and where we want to get with all these things.
Andrew Huberman: I'd like to ask about frequency but I'd like to frame it a little bit differently than that. I'd like to ask about total workout duration which dovetails with frequency because if one is hitting the appropriate number of sets per week and one is combining different muscle groups on the same days, well then workouts are going to be a very different duration than if one is doing a different body part each day, for instance. And so I feel like any discussion about frequency has to be within the context of workout duration and vice versa.

Andy Galpin: If you are a lifting junkie and you're very consistent in your schedule, I'm actually okay with body parts, but most people are not that. And so the concern there is if you say are isolating and waiting to do your glutes on one day of the week and something happens on that day, you might go another 13 days now before training, it between workouts and that's really difficult to maintain. The frequency won't be high enough unless the load and volume on that one day is astronomically high, it's just not going to happen. So while, if you look at the research frequency in terms of how many days per week doesn't matter that much as long as the total load and failure are equivalent, practically it's a challenge. So it's hard because life gets in the way for most people, especially if you have kids and a job and all these things are there. So I actually prefer doing something more like three days a week of total body and if something happens you've just missed that body part for 48 hours, 72 hours.

Andy Galpin: I like that a little better for most people. Not because it's more effective, but just because it's a little bit more resilient to life and you can get there if you wanted to actually do a little bit of a combination. So if you wanted to do like two days a week of whole body and then two days a week of a little bit of a body part split, then you're actually sort of hedging against all risks there as long as you get to that total number there. Now there is actually some evidence in a couple of ways that maybe a little bit more frequently is a little bit better. But the difficulty is now going back to the practicality question of like how many people really can train just their strength training six days a week? Well, that doesn't count any of their long duration stuff. It doesn't have their high heart rate, their flexibility. Okay. It's just really, really hard to get all that stuff in. So it tends to be easier on folks in terms of execution and long term adherence.
Andrew Huberman: Okay. So it's a little bit more of a strength type workout at that point, but then moving to a second exercise of three or four sets where the repetition ranges are now eight to 15. Shortening the rest periods to 90 seconds or so. And then on the third exercise, repetition ranges of twelve to 30. This number 30 kind of makes me wide eye. Do I know that I can't remember the last time I did a set of 30 thinking it was for hypertrophy. But what you're saying makes absolutely sense. Is research back. So very short rest intervals, maybe 30 seconds between sets, would that allow somebody to target all three forms of major adaptation? In my mind it works. You're talking about mechanical loads, you're talking about stress and damage, and you're talking about metabolic stress. Is that better than to, for instance, do all the high repetition work in one workout per week and then higher loads in the other workout? Does it matter if you divide them up or combine them?

Andy Galpin: It would not matter. I would say it matters in the sense of your personal practical situation.

Andrew Huberman: Well, long rest for me. I love training heavier with longer rest, great. But I'm hearing that there's real value to doing these higher repetition ranges.

Andy Galpin: Yeah. So the formula you set up there in a second is great. If you want to do it the other way, that's fine. It's kind of idiot proof. You can set this up however you'd like. You could actually do the inverse. Theoretically you could do the sets of 31st and then move to your sets of eight. It doesn't really matter because we're trying to just get to a certain total stimuli and you're going to hit it eventually. So you have a lot of room to play here. You also have a lot of room to adapt based on your circumstances. God, I'm short on time today. Typically my workout takes me 60 minutes. For this plan I have, I've only got 35 today. What do I do? Well, if you're training for strength, that's a different answer than if you're training for hypertrophy. If you're training for hypertrophy, you need to make sure you hit that total volume. So in this particular case, lower the load, lower the rest intervals and just get to the burn and get going as much as you can.

Andy Galpin: If you're training for strength, I would rather you cut your volume in half, get those few repetitions done at that high load, and just don't do very many sets today. That's a better result. So the goal that you're going after is going to determine what we call chaos management, which is that thing like that running out of time. Today my time is short, or you don't even think my time was short. Something got cut off. I'm not feeling it today, I'm in a hotel, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera, which is life. Right. That's going to be ten to 50% of your workouts is going to be chaos management. Well, how you make those decisions is going to go back to understanding number one, what goal you're going after. And then number two, what are the physiological consequences? We call these physiological limiters for each one and that's going to tell you what to select and prioritize the volume, the intensity or whatever else.
Andy Galpin: Well, hopefully you can see the imbalance that's going to happen there over time is you're going to do far more upper body than you are lower body, and that's not appropriate. So you just want to think about your lower body like you would do. If you're going to do body part splits, then include those things as well. And don't just chunk everything in as legs once a week. If you want to do that, that's actually okay. But that day has to be very challenging and you probably should do quite a bit of volume there because you're almost surely not going to hit the total weekly volume needed to optimize muscle growth if you're literally only doing once a week of your quote unquote legs.

Andrew Huberman: So along those lines, let's talk volume. How much volume does each muscle group need per week in order to generate and for that matter, maintain hypertrophy?

Andy Galpin: Right? So the kind of minimum number we're going to look for here is ten working sets per week. Correct.

Andrew Huberman: Per muscle group.

Andy Galpin: Correct.

Andrew Huberman: And just to make sure that everyone's on the same page, if I do a chin up or a pull up, I'm going to mainly be training my back muscles, my lats, if I'm doing.

Andy Galpin: It correctly, lats and rhomboids and biceps.

Andrew Huberman: Right? But there'll be indirect targeting of the biceps. So would you include indirect targeting? So for instance, if I you said ten sets per week, let's just use biceps because it seems that that's the go to generic muscle. Why is that, by the way? That when people ask somebody to flex their muscle, they always flex their bicep, they don't flex their calf or their quad or their glutes or something. I guess there's some public decency issues.

Andy Galpin: I can tell you with my children that's the very first muscle I taught them to flex.

Andrew Huberman: They're glutes?

Andy Galpin: No, they're biceps.
Andrew Huberman: Thank you for joining me for my conversation with Dr. Duncan French. I hope you found it as insightful and informative as I did. If you're enjoying this podcast and or learning from it, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. Please also leave us a comment or a suggestion of a future topic or future guests that you'd like us to have on the Huberman Lab podcast. In addition, please subscribe to our podcast on Apple and Spotify and on Apple, you can leave us up to a five star review. Please also check out the sponsors that we mentioned at the beginning of this episode. That's a terrific way to support this podcast. We also have a patreon. It's patreon. Andrew. Huberman. And there you can support the podcast at any level that you like. Many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab podcast. We discuss supplements. Supplements for sleep, supplements for focus, and for other health benefits as well.

Andrew Huberman: While supplements may not be for everybody, if you're going to use supplements, you want to make sure that those supplements are of the very highest quality. For that reason, we've partnered with Thorn T-H-O-R-N-E because Thorn Supplements are of the very highest quality. And the amounts of ingredients listed on the label of Thorn Supplements precisely matches what is actually contained in those capsules bottles and pills and powders and so forth. This is extremely important. A lot of analyses of supplements and supplement companies have shown that what's listed on the bottle is often not what's actually contained in the bottle. Thorn stringency is unmatched. They've partnered with all the major sports teams with the Mayo Clinic. And so there's a lot of trust in Thorn supplements for all the right reasons. If you'd like to try Thorn supplements, you can see the supplements that I take. You can go to Thornthorine.com, theletter huberman lab. You can see the supplements that I take.

Andrew Huberman: You can get 20% off any of those supplements and if you navigate into the Thorn site through that portal, you can get 20% off any of the supplements that Thorne makes. I'd also like to mention that if you're not already following us on Instagram Huberman lab, you might want to do so there. I do brief science tutorials and offer science based protocols for all sorts of things that are often separate from the protocols and information covered on the Huberman Lab podcast. We're also on Twitter. Huberman Lab. And last, and certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science.
